




_[_F_r_a_n_Á_a_i_s_]
_R_e_t_u_r_n_ _t_o_ _L_i_s_t_ _o_f_ _A_c_t_s
===============================================================================
NEW BRUNSWICK
REGULATION 86-191
under the
_O_i_l_ _a_n_d_ _N_a_t_u_r_a_l_ _G_a_s_ _A_c_t
(O.C. 86-1026)
Filed December 19, 1986
Under section¬ 59 of the Oil and Natural Gas Act, the Lieutenant-Governor in
Council makes the following Regulation:

1This Regulation may be cited as the Geophysical Exploration Regulation - Oil
and Natural Gas Act.

2In this Regulation
``Act'' means the Oil and Natural Gas Act;
``Director of Surveys'' means the Director of Surveys designated under
section¬ 3 of the Surveys Act;
``District Transportation Engineer'' means the engineer in charge of a highway
district established under section¬ 14 of the Highway Act;
``geophysical equipment'' means any equipment used for, or in connection with,
or preparatory to geophysical exploration;
``geophysical permit'' means a permit to operate geophysical equipment granted
by the Minister under section¬ 13;
``highway'' means a highway as defined in the Highway Act;
``monument'' means a device planted by a surveyor;
``municipality'' includes a rural community;
``Oil and Natural Gas Survey System'' means the survey system established under
the Survey System Regulation - Oil and Natural Gas Act;
``road'' means any public road, road allowance or right of way other than a
highway.
2005-75
GEOPHYSICAL LICENCE

3(1)An application for a geophysical licence shall be on a form provided by the
Minister and shall be accompanied by
(a)a preliminary plan, in duplicate, of the proposed geophysical exploration,
for approval by the Minister;
(b)the fee set out in Schedule A;
(c)the security deposit as set out in Schedule B;
(d)a statement of the projected cost of the proposed geophysical exploration
program; and
(e)such other information as the Minister may require.
3(2)The preliminary plan referred to in subsection¬ (1) shall
(a)be of a scale not smaller than 1:50,000;
(b)outline the area in which the geophysical exploration is to be undertaken
and show the location in accordance with the Oil and Natural Gas Survey System;
and
(c)show the approximate location of
(i)existing roads and highways to be used for access to the exploration area,
(ii)existing lines and trails to be used,
(iii)proposed lines and trails to be cleared or bulldozed, and
(iv)proposed campsites and landing strips where appropriate.
3(3)Where, in the Minister‚Äôs opinion, the proposed geophysical exploration
will result in the clearing or bulldozing of more new lines and trails than are
necessary for the geophysical exploration, the Minister may, by giving the
applicant notice, make his approval of the preliminary plan conditional upon
(a)an increase in the security deposit; and
(b)all or part of the lines and trails proposed on the preliminary plan, as
specified by the Minister, not being bulldozed or cleared.

4The Minister may grant a geophysical licence for a term of one year from the
date the licence is granted where the requirements of section¬ 3 are met.

5An application for renewal of a geophysical licence shall be made by
submitting to the Minister, at least thirty days before the termination of the
geophysical licence,
(a)an application on a form provided by the Minister;
(b)the fee set out in Schedule A;
(c)the security deposit as set out in Schedule B;
(d)a statement of the total expenditure made by the geophysical licensee during
the term of the then existing licence;
(e)a copy of the final report under subsection¬ 12(1);
(f)evidence satisfactory to the Minister that the Act and the regulations have
been complied with;
(g)a statement of the projected cost of the geophysical exploration program;
and
(h)such other information as the Minister may require.

6The Minister may renew a geophysical licence for terms of one year each from
the date the renewals are granted where, for each renewal, the requirements of
section¬ 5 are met.

7The following are the terms and conditions of every geophysical licence
granted by the Minister:
(a)where a geophysical licensee terminates his licence or discontinues carrying
on business in the Province or, being a corporation, ceases to exist as a
corporate entity within the Province, all reports, plans, data and maps
supplied become property of the Crown in right of New Brunswick and may be made
available to the public by the Minister after the expiration of one year after
the termination of the licence;
(b)a geophysical licensee is liable for the cost of repairing damage caused by
a geophysical permittee doing geophysical exploration on his behalf;
(c)a geophysical licensee shall follow the preliminary plan conditionally or
otherwise approved by the Minister and shall not bulldoze or clear the certain
lines and trails specified by the Minister not to be bulldozed or cleared; and
(d)a geophysical licensee shall comply with the Act and this Regulation and
shall ensure that any person acting on his behalf shall so comply.

8(1)Before a geophysical licensee recommences geophysical exploration that has
been interrupted or ceased for a period of time longer than one month, he shall
submit a new preliminary plan in accordance with subsection¬ 3(2) to the
Minister for his approval.
8(2)The new preliminary plan submitted by a geophysical licensee under
subsection¬ (1) shall be deemed to be approved by the Minister on the eleventh
day after the date it is received by the Minister unless the Minister gives
prior written notice to the applicant that
(a)the plan does not comply with subsection¬ 3(2),
(b)the Minister has given conditional approval under subsection¬ 3(3), or
(c)the Minister requires further information.

9(1)Every geophysical licensee shall allow the Minister, or any person
designated by the Minister for the purpose, to inspect, at any reasonable time
at the business premises of the licensee, any field data or field reports
obtained by the licensee or his representatives during the course of conducting
operations.
9(2)Upon the request of the Minister or any person designated by the Minister
for the purpose, every geophysical licensee shall, without notice, forthwith
produce for inspection in New Brunswick any field data or field reports
obtained by the licensee or his representatives during the course of conducting
operations.

10Every geophysical licensee and his representatives shall render to the
Minister or any person designated by him such assistance as may be necessary
for the purpose of enabling the Minister or that person to inspect the field
data or field reports.
PROGRESS REPORTS

11(1)A geophysical licensee shall advise the Minister
(a)of the location of the headquarters of each crew operating under the
authority of the licence; and
(b)promptly of any change in the location of such headquarters.
11(2)A geophysical licensee shall file in duplicate with the Minister before
the last day of each month a plan showing
(a)the location of all lines or trails made or constructed by the geophysical
licensee under his licence;
(b)the location of roads, highways, lines or trails which have been used under
the geophysical licence; and
(c)the identifying number and location of each shothole and testhole made
during the preceding month by the licensee or by a permittee who conducted
geophysical exploration on behalf of the licensee.
11(3)The plan required by subsection¬ (2) shall be prepared in accordance with
the requirements of subsection¬ 3(2).
11(4)Notwithstanding subsection¬ (3), where a series of shotholes or testholes
are drilled in a pattern and the location of each hole cannot be conveniently
shown on the plan, the location of the holes may be shown by an insert.
11(5)A geophysical licensee shall inform the Minister in writing of the
completion of geophysical exploration within thirty days after the completion.
FINAL REPORT AND FINAL PLAN

12(1)A geophysical licensee shall file with the Minister not later than thirty
days after the completion of geophysical exploration, in duplicate, a final
report in Form 1 certified by a geologist, registered land surveyor or
registered professional engineer.
12(2)A geophysical licensee shall file with the Minister, not later than three
months after completion of geophysical exploration, a final plan in duplicate
showing in detail
(a)the location of all new lines and trails made or constructed under the
licence;
(b)the location of existing roads, highways, lines and trails which have been
used under the licence; and
(c)the identifying number and location of each shothole and testhole made in
performance of the geophysical exploration.
12(3)The final plan filed under subsection¬ (2), in addition to the
requirements of subsection¬ (2), shall
(a)include locations, in accordance with the Oil and Natural Gas Survey System,
certified by a geologist, registered land surveyor or registered professional
engineer;
(b)be of a scale not smaller than 1:50,000;
(c)show the name of the geophysical licensee submitting the plan and the number
of his licence; and
(d)include the name, permit number and address for service of any permittee who
conducted geophysical exploration on behalf of the geophysical licensee.
12(4)Together with the final plan filed under subsection¬ (2), the geophysical
licensee shall file logs with the Minister on each testhole, providing all
available information on
(a)the materials encountered during drilling; and
(b)the conditions in the testhole, whether it is dry, flowing or stable.
12(5)After filing the final report under subsection¬ (1), a geophysical
licensee shall, at the request of the Minister, make available to him for
purposes of investigation and inspection all geophysical information and data
obtained for each seismic survey completed.
12(6)The final report filed by the geophysical licensee under subsection¬ (1)
shall be accompanied by a copy of the computer stacking diagram for each line
in the geophysical exploration.
GEOPHYSICAL PERMIT

13(1)No person shall operate geophysical equipment unless
(a)he holds a geophysical permit; and
(b)he holds a geophysical licence or the work is being conducted on behalf of a
geophysical licensee.
13(2)An application for a geophysical permit shall be
(a)on a form provided by the Minister; and
(b)accompanied by the fee set out in Schedule A.
13(3)The Minister may grant a geophysical permit for a term of one year from
the date the permit is granted where the requirements of subsection¬ (2) are
met.

14(1)An application for renewal of a geophysical permit shall be made by
submitting to the Minister, at least thirty days before the termination of the
geophysical permit,
(a)an application on a form provided by the Minister; and
(b)the fee set out in Schedule A.
14(2)The Minister may renew a geophysical permit for terms of one year each
from the date the renewals are granted where, for each renewal, the
requirements of subsection¬ (1) are met.

15The Minister may cancel a geophysical permit where the permittee does not
comply with a provision of the Act or this Regulation.

16(1)A permittee shall, by conspicuous letters and numbers not less than ten
centimetres high, mark both sides of each unit of automotive equipment used in
his operations with ‚ÄúGPP NO.‚Äù followed by his permit number.
16(2)Subsection¬ (1) does not apply to passenger vehicles used by supervisory
personnel.
16(3)No permittee shall use a unit of automotive equipment marked with more
than one permit number.
GEOPHYSICAL EXPLORATION

17(1)A geophysical permittee shall not work
(a)within the bounds of a municipality unless the consent in writing of the
municipal authority is obtained; or
(b)within any highway right of way unless the consent in writing of the
District Transportation Engineer is obtained.
17(2)Where a geophysical permittee has obtained consent in writing under
subsection¬ (1) to perform geophysical exploration, he shall
(a)make copies of the written consent available to the Minister on request; and
(b)immediately notify the District Transportation Engineer and municipal
authority when work ceases.

18Nothing in this Regulation or the Act exempts a geophysical permittee from
the provisions of the Forest Fires Act and the Fire Prevention Act.

19(1)A geophysical licensee is liable for any loss or damage resulting from any
fire caused directly or indirectly by
(a)his personal negligence,
(b)the negligence of a permittee acting on behalf of the geophysical licensee,
and
(c)the negligence of any other agent or employee,
upon or adjacent to the lands on which geophysical exploration is being
conducted by him or on his behalf.
19(2)When a fire starts on or threatens the land or improvements on which
geophysical exploration is being conducted, the geophysical licensee, the
permittee and their employees and agents shall give, free of charge, their fire
fighting services.
SURVEY MONUMENTS

20(1)Before the commencement of any clearing, ditching or grading work, a
permittee shall
(a)ascertain from the Director of Surveys the location of monuments in the
vicinity of the proposed geophysical exploration;
(b)mark conspicuously the location of each monument by a flag attached to the
top of a pole standing at least 1.5¬ metres above the ground; and
(c)take such other precautions as may be necessary to ensure that no monument
is defaced, altered, displaced, disturbed or damaged during the course of
geophysical exploration.
20(2)Where a monument is found in a damaged or disturbed condition, a permittee
shall immediately notify the Director of Surveys.
20(3)If a monument is destroyed, moved or damaged by a permittee, he shall
(a)immediately notify the Director of Surveys; and
(b)make payment as required by the Director of Surveys for the restoration of
the monument.
20(4)Restoration of a monument shall be made by a registered land surveyor
acting under instructions of the Director of Surveys.
USE OF LAND, HIGHWAYS AND ROADS

21(1)A permittee shall not clear land, with the exception of snow removal,
ditching or grading closer than one metre from the limits of a highway right of
way or a road right of way.
21(2)Notwithstanding subsection¬ (1), a permittee may clear within one metre
from the limits of a highway right of way or road right of way where an exit
from or an entry onto a highway right of way or road right of way is required.

22No permittee shall in the course of his operations do anything that is likely
to result in interference with the natural drainage of land.

23No permittee shall drive a spike, pin or other pointed object into the bed of
a highway in the course of his operations unless permission is obtained from
the District Transportation Engineer.

24No permittee shall
(a)leave bushes, trees, debris, refuse or other material within the limits of a
highway right of way or road right of way;
(b)leave a highway right of way or road right of way in a damaged or rutted
condition; or
(c)leave mud or cuttings piled within the limits of a highway right of way or
road right of way, or leave snow on a highway or road.

25In conducting his operations a permittee shall take care to preserve as much
as possible a free and uninterrupted passage of traffic along any highway or
road.

26Where conditions are such that a highway right of way or road right of way is
damaged or is likely to be damaged by the use of heavy equipment, a permittee
shall suspend his operations unless he
(a)accepts full responsibility for any damage to the highway right of way or
road right of way, and
(b)gives the municipal authority or the District Transportation Engineer a
written undertaking and, if so required, adequate financial security to the
satisfaction of the authority concerned to guarantee that repairs shall be made
immediately where damage is done.

27Damage to a highway right of way or road right of way shall be repaired to
the satisfaction of the owner of the highway right of way or road right of way.

28Where a highway or road is under construction, no permittee shall conduct
geophysical exploration on that portion of the highway or road under
construction until permission to do so is obtained from the person actually in
charge of the construction and, in the case of a highway, from the District
Transportation Engineer.

29Where a section of a highway right of way is under construction, no permittee
shall undertake any work until permission is obtained from the District
Transportation Engineer.

30Where a permittee constructs a road for access to the area where geophysical
exploration is being carried out, the work shall be done in a manner consistent
with good road construction practices and the cost of construction shall be
borne by the permittee.

31(1)The Minister may investigate the clearing of land or disturbance of soil,
and the work or restoration with respect to drainage, disposal of refuse, or
any other matter in relation to geophysical exploration which may affect the
present or future use of
(a)the land; or
(b)a highway right of way or road right of way.
31(2)An investigation under subsection¬ (1) shall be carried out by the
permittee in accordance with the written instructions of either the Minister or
a District Transportation Engineer.

32(1)A geophysical licensee and a permittee shall allow any person for ordinary
travel either on foot or by horse-drawn or motor vehicle to use, free of
charge, any trails or roads
(a)constructed or built by them or on their behalf, or
(b)maintained by them in connection with their geophysical exploration,
but such person shall not interfere in any way with the licensee‚Äôs or
permittee‚Äôs use of the trail or road.
32(2)A geophysical licensee or a permittee desiring to use in connection with
his geophysical exploration a road built by another licensee or permittee may
do so upon bearing a proportionate part of the
(a)initial costs of the construction of the road less annual depreciation; and
(b)costs of maintenance of the road proportional to the use of such road by the
several users.
32(3)Where the parties fail to reach an agreement on the proportionate costs
under subsection¬ (2), the matter shall be placed before the Minister and the
decision of the Minister shall be final and binding on all parties.
SHOTHOLES AND TESTHOLES

33(1)A permittee shall mark each testhole and shothole with a metal tag upon
which shall be inscribed the number of the testhole or shothole and the
permittee‚Äôs permit number.
33(2)The metal tag referred to in subsection¬ (1) shall
(a)be at least seven and one-half centimetres in width and fifteen centimetres
in length;
(b)be of a conspicuous colour;
(c)be wired or nailed to a post or tree;
(d)be affixed so that it faces the hole and is not farther than ten metres from
the hole; and
(e)where the hole is on a highway right of way or road right of way, be on the
same side of the right of way.

34No permittee shall drill a testhole or shothole within
(a)thirty-five metres of a gas, oil or water pipeline, cable or transmission
line, or any other utility buried under the surface;
(b)one hundred and twenty metres of a water well;
(c)fifteen metres of a monument;
(d)fifteen metres of a driveway or gateway; or
(e)one hundred and fifty metres of a residence, school, church or other
building, or cemetery.

35If the firing of a shot disturbs the plug of a previously abandoned shothole
or testhole, a permittee shall recomplete the plugging of the previously
abandoned shothole or testhole in compliance with this Regulation.

36A permittee shall spread any surplus soil or other material removed in the
drilling of any shothole or testhole so as to avoid interference with drainage
and to permit access to adjoining property.

37(1)If any underground water is released from a shothole or testhole in
drilling operations and flows to the surface, a permittee shall
(a)cease drilling operations;
(b)plug the hole to prevent the flow of water; and
(c)immediately report the location of the shothole or testhole to the Minister.
37(2)Notwithstanding subsection¬ (1), the shothole or testhole referred to in
subsection¬ (1) may be completed as a water well where
(a)the flow of water is properly controlled;
(b)arrangements have previously been made with the surface owner and lawful
occupant;
(c)completion of the shothole or testhole will not result in damage to other
lands or property or interfere with the rights of others; and
(d)the shothole or testhole is not located on a highway right of way.

38(1)A permittee shall plug a testhole as follows:
(a)a plug not less than one metre in length shall be inserted firmly in the
hole so that the top of the plug is 0.5¬ metres below the surface, and
(i)if the plug is made of cement or concrete, the hole shall be filled and
properly tamped, or
(ii)if the plug is made of wood, at least fifteen centimetres of dry cement
shall be placed on top of the plug to fill the hole and the hole shall be
properly tamped; and
(b)the drilling mud and any material obtained from the hole shall be returned
to fill the hole and any remaining mud and other material shall be spread over
the ground so that the surface of the land is restored as closely as possible
to its original condition.
38(2)A permittee shall firmly plug a shothole with a wooden, cement or other
plug having a diameter of not less than the diameter of the hole and at least
0.5¬ metres in length and
(a)the plug shall be driven into the hole so that the top of the plug is
0.5¬ metres below the surface and the hole shall be filled and properly tamped;
and
(b)the drilling mud and any other material obtained from the hole shall be
returned to fill the hole.
38(3)If winter conditions prevent the proper insertion of a plug or the proper
tamping, a permittee may temporarily insert a plug to the level of the surface
but, as soon as conditions allow, the permittee shall complete the plugging of
the shothole or testhole in accordance with this Regulation.
RESTORATION

39(1)If, as a result of a permittee‚Äôs operations, any damage occurs, whether
(a)by the caving-in of the sides of a hole,
(b)by the interference with drainage,
(c)by the release of underground water, or
(d)otherwise,
the permittee shall at his own expense take immediate steps to remedy the
damage and prevent any recurrence thereof.
39(2)If property is damaged as a result of a permittee‚Äôs operations, the
permittee shall immediately restore the property as closely as possible to its
original condition.
39(3)Notwithstanding subsection¬ (2), if it is not possible to make the repairs
immediately, the permittee shall take the necessary steps to ensure against
further damage and shall make the repairs with as little delay as possible.

40Where a permittee is informed of damage caused by his operations and fails to
take immediate action to repair the damage, the Minister may
(a)have the damage repaired; and
(b)require the geophysical licensee for whom the permittee was conducting the
operations, in addition to any other penalty to which he may be subject, to be
assessed the cost incurred in making the necessary repairs.
GENERAL

41(1)The Minister may order any crew operating under a geophysical licensee or
under a permittee acting on his behalf to cease its operations if, in the
opinion of the Minister, there has been a contravention of the Act or this
Regulation.
41(2)The Minister may permit the crew to resume operations upon such terms and
conditions as the Minister considers appropriate.

42Where notice is given by mail by the Minister under the Act or this
Regulation, such notice shall be deemed to have been given on the third day
after the date of mailing.

43Where notice is required to be given by the Minister under the Act or this
Regulation, such notice shall be sufficiently given if delivered personally in
writing to any person in charge of the operations for or on behalf of the
permittee or geophysical licensee.

44This Regulation comes into force on January¬ 1, 1987.

SCHEDULE A
Fees
(a)[Image]Geophysical Licence         $250
                                       
¬ 
(b)[Image]Geophysical Licence Renewal $¬ ¬ 25
                                       
¬ 
(c)[Image]Geophysical Permit          $¬ ¬ 50
                                       
¬ 
(d)[Image]Geophysical Permit Renewal  $¬ ¬ 25
SCHEDULE B
Security Deposit
The security deposit shall be ten per cent of the projected cost of the
geophysical exploration program up to a maximum of $50,000 per program.
FORM 1
FINAL REPORT
Geophysical Licensee
Geophysical Licence No.
Address
Program Commencement Date
Completion Date
Permittee
Geophysical Permit No.[Image]Party No.
Address
Recording Commencement Date
Recording Completion Date[Image]Model
Amplifier Make
No. of Traces¬ ______[Image]______[Image]______
[Image]24[Image]48[Image]other
Source Internal[Image]Receiver Internal
Source Type
No. of kilometres of Subsurface Coverage
Credit (in dollars) Applied For
I, the undersigned, certify that I am qualified to report on this program and
have knowledge of and attest to the accuracy of the above report.
                               
¬ 
Signature of geologist,       Date
registered land surveyor or    
registered professional        
engineer                       
(Note: Must be accompanied by a map or maps on a scale of not smaller than 1:
50,000 showing location of data recorded. A final report must be completed for
each program.)
N.B. This Regulation is consolidated to July¬ 15, 2005.
