       Canada-PEI Agriculture Stewardship Program
                       Beneficial Management Practices (BMP)

             HEDGEROW AND RIPARIAN ZONE TREE/SHRUB PLANTING
                          BMP # 1002, 1004, 1901
Hedgerows and riparian zone tree plantings are an essential part of Prince Edward Island’s
landscape and they provide many benefits for crop production, fish and wildlife habitat and the
environment.

Eligibility Criteria:
   •   An Environmental Farm Plan (EFP) must have been completed/updated WITHIN THE
       PAST FIVE YEARS.
   •   The project you wish to complete must be identified in your EFP Action Plan.
   •   Funds will be allocated on receipt of completed applications. No expenditure will be
       funded which is incurred prior to written approval.
   •   The project must be completed according to an approved standard.
   •   The Project Advisor must complete a site visit prior to project initiation to review options
       and discuss project detail with applicant. Contact Mike Butler, Department of
       Environment, Energy and Forestry, at (902) 368-4700 or mjbutler@gov.pe.ca or
       Tyler Wright , PEI Agriculture at (902)569-7642 or tmwright@gov.pe.ca for
       additional information.

Eligible Expenses:
   • seedlings
   • planting costs including site preparation
   •   fill planting

Funding Assistance:
Assistance for expenditures will be provided at a rate of 66% of eligible costs to a maximum of
$20,000 within the Riparian Area Management and Shelterbelt Establishment category.

Responsibilities of Applicant:
The applicant must ensure that all trees/shrubs planted through this program are properly
managed for a minimum 15 year period.

Hedgerow Requirements:
   •   Tree planting must be done to an approved standard. The Project Advisor will
   •   arrange for:
           o supplying the seedlings
           o preparing the site
           o planting the seedlings
   •   To participate in the program, the applicant must have a minimum one hectare (2.5
       acres) land holding and be willing to plant at least 300 trees/shrubs.
   •   The survival rate should be determined within 12 months of planting and dead trees
       should be replaced within this time period. If it has been determined that the cause of
       tree mortality is not owner negligence, fill planting will be performed as follows based on
       survival rate:
           o Less than 70%, plant replacement costs including site preparation and planting
               will be the responsibility of the Department of Environment, Energy and Forestry,
            o   Greater than 70% but less than 90%, the Department of Environment, Energy
                and Forestry will supply replacement plants at no cost, but the landowner is
                responsible for the replanting.
            o   Greater than 90%, replacements will not be provided.



The Canada-Prince Edward Island Agriculture Stewardship Program is part of Growing Forward, a Federal-
Provincial-Territorial Initiative.
