    Canada-PEI Agriculture Stewardship Program
               Beneficial Management Practices (BMP)

                              WETLAND RESTORATION
                                   BMP #1008
Wetland projects can be utilized to biologically reduce the concentration of pollutants in a
variety of wastewater sources that can originate on the farm. Integrating wetland projects
with other conservation activities on the landscape can result in environmental benefits
such as improved soil and water quality. Wetlands have the ability to maintain or
enhance water quality by retaining excess nitrogen and phosphorus from agricultural
run-off. Nitrogen-rich runoff that reaches a wetland is absorbed, denitrified, or utilized by
the abundant plant growth or bacteria that inhabit a wetland. Wetland projects improve
agricultural sustainability while enhancing environmental benefits. These wetlands can
also provide excellent habitat for waterfowl and other wildlife.


Eligibility Criteria:
   •   An Environmental Farm Plan (EFP) must have been completed WITHIN THE
       PAST FIVE YEARS for all owned properties.
   •   The project you wish to complete must be identified in your EFP Action Plan.
   •   The Project Advisor must approve the plan or design that will be used.
   •   Funds will be allocated on receipt of completed applications. No expenditure
       will be funded which is incurred prior to final written approval.
   •   The Project Advisor must complete a site visit prior to project initiation to review
       options and discuss project detail with applicant. Contact Jonathan Platts, at
       Ducks Unlimited Canada, (902)-569-4544 for additional information.

Eligible Expenses:
   •   consultant fees
   •   contracted construction expenses
   •   equipment rental
   •   seeding and site stabilization costs

Funding Assistance:
Assistance for expenditures will be provided at a rate of 75% of eligible expenses, to a
maximum of $7,500 per wetland project.

Responsibilities of Applicant:
   •   The applicant must adhere to the Construction Guidelines for Wetland
       Restoration to mitigate potential environmental risks during construction. These
       will be provided with project approval.
   •   The applicant is responsible for obtaining all required licenses, permits,
       approvals or authorizations and for complying with all applicable municipal,
       provincial and federal legislation.
   •   The applicant must ensure that all works constructed through this program must
       be maintained and properly managed for a minimum 15 year period.
Wetland Restoration Requirements:
   •   The proposed project must be on an agricultural landscape and provide filtering
       capacity for agriculture runoff.
   •   In order to be eligible for assistance the Project Advisor with Ducks Unlimited
       Canada must verify:
           o the original existence of a wetland
           o that the alteration of the wetland has resulted in a negative impact to the
               function of the wetland
           o that the ecological function of the wetland can be restored
   •   The plan for a restored wetland must be designed by a qualified consultant and
       the plan must be submitted with the project application. The Project Advisor with
       Ducks Unlimited Canada will either perform or assist in the design of the restored
       wetland and they will provide assistance in developing a cost estimate.
   •   The restored wetland must be constructed to an approved standard. The Project
       Advisor with Ducks Unlimited Canada will provide guidance to the contractor and
       they will inspect the completed project.
   •   Berms and any disturbed areas surrounding the restored wetland must be
       stabilized and seeded immediately after construction.




The Canada-Prince Edward Island Agriculture Stewardship Program is part of Growing Forward, a
Federal-Provincial-Territorial Initiative.
