       Canada-PEI Agriculture Stewardship Program
                  Beneficial Management Practices (BMP)

                       NUTRIENT MANAGEMENT PLANNING
                                    BMP # 2401
Properly managed nutrients can reduce negative impacts on water and air quality.
The primary goal of nutrient management planning is to optimize a nutrient=s
advantages and minimize their disadvantages. Prince Edward Island derives all of
its drinking water from ground water sources and therefore is very concerned with
overuse, abuse and inefficient application of nutrients applied to the land. A Nutrient
Management Plan is a responsible approach to maintaining and protecting the
Island=s drinking water quality.

Eligibility Criteria:
   •   An Environmental Farm Plan (EFP) must have been completed/updated WITHIN
       THE PAST FIVE YEARS.
   •   The project you wish to complete must be identified in your EFP Action Plan.
   •   Funds will be allocated on receipt of completed applications. No expenditure will be
       funded which is incurred prior to final written project approval.
   •   The Project Advisor must be consulted by the Nutrient Management Planner prior to
       project initiation to review and discuss details of what is required in a completed
       Nutrient Management Plan. For further information, please contact Barry
       Thompson at (902) 368-6366 or blthompson@gov.pe.ca

Eligible Expenses:
Consultant fees associated with preparing a nutrient management plan and costs associated
with any resources materials required as part of the plan.
This would include planning and decision support tools such as specialized nutrient
management computer software and aerial photography.

Funding Levels:
Assistance for expenditures will be provided a rate of 50% of eligible expenses to a
maximum of $6,000.

Responsibilities of Applicant:
The applicant agrees to implement the Nutrient Management Plan developed through this
BMP.

* Recognized Nutrient Management Planner is an individual who has completed the Nutrient
Management Training course through Nova Scotia Agricultural College and Prince Edward Island
Nutrient Management training sessions.



The Canada-Prince Edward Island Agriculture Stewardship Program is part of Growing Forward, a
Federal-Provincial-Territorial Initiative.
