    Canada-PEI Agriculture Stewardship Program
                 Beneficial Management Practices (BMP)

                            ON-FARM PESTICIDE STORAGE
                                    BMP # 0801
Agricultural pesticides can pose a threat to human health and to the environment if not properly
handled and stored. It is important to reduce pesticide risk during storage by minimizing the
quantity that is stored on-farm and by preventing spills.

Eligibility Criteria:
    • An Environmental Farm Plan (EFP) must have been completed/updated WITHIN THE
         PAST FIVE YEARS.
    • The project you wish to complete must be identified in your EFP Action Plan.
    • The Project Advisor must approve the design that will be used for the pesticide storage
    • Funds will be allocated on receipt of completed applications. No expenditure will be
         funded which is incurred prior to written approval.
    • The Project Advisor must complete a site visit prior to project initiation to review options
         and discuss project detail with applicant. Contact George Piercey, PEI Department of
         Agriculture, at (902)620-3044 gapiercey@gov.pe.ca for additional information.

Eligible Expenses:
Eligible expenses will include, but may not be limited to the following:
    • site preparation
    • materials, labour, and equipment rentals
    • electrical costs (must be installed by licensed electrical contractor )
    • approved, pre-built portable structures

Funding Assistance:
Assistance for expenditures will be provided at a rate of 50% of the first $10,000 of eligible costs
and 30% on the next $10,000 to a maximum of $8,000 per farm unit.

Responsibilities of Applicant:
   • The applicant must adhere to the Construction Guidelines for Improved On-Farm Storage
      and Handling of Fertilizers, Pesticides and Petroleum Products to mitigate potential
      environmental risks during construction. These will be provided with project approval.
   • The applicant is responsible for obtaining required licenses, permits, approvals or
      authorizations and for complying with all applicable municipal, provincial and federal
      legislation.
   • The applicant must ensure that all works constructed through this program will be
      maintained and properly managed for a minimum 15 year period.
   • The applicant must inform the local fire chief with the location of the pesticide storage
      facility and an estimate of the maximum quantity of pesticides that will be held on the
      farm at any one time. An inventory control system must be in place to enable the
      inventory to be determined after a fire has occurred. A copy of this inventory is to be
      maintained in a separate location.
   • The applicant must post emergency numbers by the nearest phone for the Fire
      Department/ police/ ambulance (911), Poison Control Centre, Provincial Environmental
      Emergency Office and Provincial Pesticide Enforcement Office.
   • The applicant must have on site reference Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) for all
      stored pesticides.
Pesticide Storage Requirements:
The storage of pesticide products on farms are regulated in the province by the Fire Marshall’s
office. The applicable fire code, NFPA 434 Code for the Storage of Pesticides, provides for the
safe storage of pesticides and safe mitigation of releases of these materials where involved in fire
and non-fire incidents.

Requirements include:
   • The pesticide storage facility must be used exclusively for the storage of pesticides.
   • Stock plans are available through the Project Advisor.
   • Incompatible materials shall not be stored within 8 meters (26.3 feet) of a pesticide
       storage.
   • The pesticide storage building must:
           o be at least 30 meters (100 feet) from the nearest water body
           o be at least 15 meters (50 feet) from the nearest well or fuel storage
           o have no risk of releasing a contaminating substance to a water body
   • The floor in the storage area must be constructed to contain and control spillage of
       pesticides and potential fire protection water. The floors in the pesticide storage area
       must be constructed of concrete or some other water impervious and chemical resistant
       material. The concrete walls and floor are to be poured at the same time to ensure a
       watertight seal. The concrete floor and walls must be constructed to contain 150% of the
       volume of all pesticide stored in the facility at any one time and the wall must be a
       minimum of 10 centimeters (4 inches) above floor level to prevent the flow of liquid to
       adjoining areas.
   • The pesticide storage must have adequate ventilation which can be either mechanical or
       natural. A mechanical ventilation system must have continuous eave venting as well as
       venting in the gable ends. The ventilation fan must have an adequately sized duct that
       must extend downward to within 15 centimeters (6 inches) of the floor. A natural
       ventilation system must have continuous eave venting as well as venting in the gable
       ends and it must have exhaust louvers around the perimeter of the storage within 15
       centimeters (6 inches) of the floor.
   • “NO SMOKING” signs must be placed conspicuously within storage areas and at all
       entrances to storage areas. Also, a notice, in a form approved by the Minister or
       appointed official, and bearing the words “WARNING - PESTICIDE STORAGE” must be
       fixed and maintained on the outside of each door leading into the room where the
       pesticide is stored,
   • The storage area must have a secure lock on the door and must be locked unless the
       holder of the pesticide applicator license or their employee is present on the premises on
       which the pesticide is stored. Doors must open outwards.
   • It is recommended that pesticides be stored in areas free of moisture, excessive heat, or
       freeze/thaw cycles. If pesticides are to be stored over winter, an insulated room should
       be constructed in the pesticide storage with supplemental heat.
   • The storage must have a minimum 4.5 kilogram (10 pound) ABC type fire extinguisher.
   • Any electrical work associated with pesticide storage must be performed by a licensed
       electrical contractor. The electrical contractor must submit a copy of the Certificate of
       Compliance to the farmer.




The Canada-Prince Edward Island Agriculture Stewardship Program is part of Growing Forward, a
Federal-Provincial-Territorial Initiative.
