    Canada-PEI Agriculture Stewardship Program
               Beneficial Management Practices (BMP)

                 IRRIGATION EQUIPMENT MODIFICATIONS
            TO IMPROVE WATER OR NUTRIENT USE EFFICIENCY
                              BMP # 1801
The largest use of water by agriculture is for the irrigation of crops. Advancements in
technology allow producers to adopt irrigation systems that use water more efficiently.
Using irrigation water more efficiently, helps assure a more secure supply for other users
while maintaining adequate base flow rates for aquatic organisms. By decreasing the
rate of evaporation losses, concentrations of salts and minerals can be lowered,
resulting in better quality water reaching the crop roots.

Irrigation systems can be utilized to more efficiently apply nutrients and in some cases
certain pesticides to crops. These systems must include mechanisms or equipment that
prevent the backflow of altered irrigation water to avoid pollution of the water supply
system from which the irrigation water originated.

Eligibility Criteria:
   •   An Environmental Farm Plan (EFP) must have been completed WITHIN THE
       PAST FIVE YEARS.
   •   The project you wish to complete must be identified in your EFP Action Plan.
   •   Funds will be allocated on receipt of completed applications. No expenditure
       will be funded which is incurred prior to final written approval.
   •   The Project Advisor must complete a site visit prior to project initiation to review
       options and discuss project detail with applicant. Contact Scott Anderson, PEI
       Department of Agriculture, at (902)368-5643 or gsanderson@gov.pe.ca for
       additional information.

Eligible Expenses:
   •   Irrigation Equipment Modification/Improvement to Increase Water Use
       Efficiency Funding will be provided to assist a producer to change to a more
       water use efficient irrigation system. Funding will not be provided for
       establishing a new irrigation system that involves increased irrigated
       acres. Eligible irrigation systems include low pressure/low clearance sprinklers,
       emitters for trickle or drip irrigation systems (above or below ground, including
       installation costs), and low pressure booms. Where efficient irrigation equipment
       has already been implemented, funding may be provided for monitoring
       equipment such as soil moisture sensors or evapotranspiration monitoring
       equipment, that enable producers to further increase water use efficiency and
       prevent over application. Funding will not be provided for pumps, pipe
       infrastructure (ie. Centre pivot, wheel move structures, traveling reels, mainline
       pipe) and water source development costs.

   •   Irrigation Equipment Modification/Improvement to Increase Nutrient Use
       Efficiency Fertigation technology provides opportunities for more efficient
       utilization of nutrients by applying dissolved nutrients through irrigation water.
       Fertilizer applications can be applied at various times throughout the growing
       season as required by crops with fertigation. This reduces the risk of nitrogen
       losses resulting from applying all of the crop nutrient requirements at the
       beginning of the growing season. Fertigation is especially advantageous for
       intensive cropping systems such as horticultural crops being irrigated through
       drip or trickle irrigation. Eligible activities include the purchase, modification, and
       installation of fertigation equipment, including containment tanks, mixing/
       blending/ metering systems, and backflow valves.

   •   Preventing Backflow of Irrigation Water Funding will be provided to assist a
       producer to implement a new or improved backflow prevention
       mechanism/equipment to an existing irrigation system fertigation. Funding will not
       be provided for repair or maintenance of an existing backflow prevention system
       that is in place meets industry standards.

Funding Assistance:
Assistance for expenditures will be provided at a rate of 30% of eligible expenses to a
maximum of $10,000 per category.

Responsibilities of Applicant:
   •   The applicant is responsible for obtaining all required licenses, permits,
       approvals or authorizations and for complying with all applicable municipal,
       provincial and federal legislation.
   •   If an applicant plans to fertigate, he must install a backflow device.




The Canada-Prince Edward Island Agriculture Stewardship Program is part of Growing Forward, a
Federal-Provincial-Territorial Initiative.
