                             PLEASE NOTE
This document, prepared by the Legislative Counsel Office, is an office
consolidation of this regulation, current to December 26, 2009. It is intended for
information and reference purposes only.

This document is not the official version of these regulations. The regulations and
the amendments printed in the Royal Gazette should be consulted to determine the
authoritative text of these regulations.

For more information concerning the history of these regulations, please see the
Table of Regulations.

If you find any errors or omissions in this consolidation, please contact:

                            Legislative Counsel Office
                               Tel: (902) 368-4291
                           Email: legislation@gov.pe.ca
                          CHAPTER E-9

              ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION ACT

     WASTE RESOURCE MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS

Pursuant to section 25 of the Environmental Protection Act R.S.P.E.I.
1988, Cap. E-9, Council made the following regulations:

1. In these regulations                                                       Definitions

    (a) “Act” means the Environmental Protection Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988,         Act
    Cap. E-9;
    (b) “active area” means any area used for transfer, storage, disposal,    active area
    separation, processing or treatment of compostable material
    including the tipping area, the composting area and the curing pad;
    (c) “active composting area” means any area used for the initial          active composting
    active phase, distinguished by a rapid increase in composting             area

    temperature to 55 degrees celsius or higher, of in-vessel composting
    or open windrow composting;
    (d) “approval” means Ministerial approval pursuant to section 2;          approval

    (e) “backyard composting” means the composting at a residential           backyard
    dwelling site of organic waste, including grass clippings, leaves or
    food waste, where
       (i) the waste is generated by the residents of the dwelling unit or
       neighbouring dwelling units or both, and
       (ii) the annual production of compost does not exceed 60 cubic
       metres;
    (f) “biosolids” means organic materials which originated as settled       biosolids
    matter in facilities treating municipal or industrial liquid wastes and
    may be used as feedstock for composting operations;
    (g) “CCME Guidelines” means the Canadian Council of Ministers             CCME Guidelines
    of the Environment document “Guidelines for Compost Quality”
    dated March 1996 as amended from time to time;
    (h) “Canadian Environmental Quality Guidelines” means the                 Canadian
    Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment document                 Environmental
                                                                              Quality Guidelines
    “Canadian Environmental Quality Guidelines” dated 1999 as
    amended from time to time;
    (h.1) “carrier” means a carrier that is authorized under the laws of      carrier
    Canada or a province to transport hazardous waste;


                                    1
2                     Cap. E-9                 Environmental Protection Act           Updated 2009
                                          Waste Resource Management Regulations


compost                    (i) “compost” means a product of composting which is used or sold
                           for use as a soil amendment, artificial topsoil or growing medium or
                           for some other application to land in accordance with these
                           regulations;
compostables               (j) “compostables” means
                              (i) food scraps including meat, fish, dairy products and bones,
                              (ii) paper food wrap,
                              (iii) boxboard containers and packaging,
                              (iv) all non-recyclable paper products including, but not limited
                              to, paper towels, paper tubes, paper plates, construction and
                              poster paper, and wax paper,
                              (v) leaves and yard waste, and
                              (vi) any other material that is biodegradable and organic.
composting                 (k) “composting” means the biological decomposition of organic
                           materials, substances or objects under controlled circumstances to a
                           condition sufficiently stable for nuisance-free storage and safe use in
                           land applications;
composting area            (l) “composting area” means an area where organic material
                           undergoes the rapid initial stage of composting;
composting facility        (m) “composting facility” means a waste resource management
                           facility where composting occurs;
compostable                (n) “compostable organic material” means vegetative matter, food
organic material           processing waste, landscaping, garden and horticultural wastes,
                           kitchen scraps, food processing wastes, and other organic wastes
                           which can be readily composted in composting facilities;
corporation                (o) “corporation” means the Island Waste Management Corporation
                           constituted pursuant to section 18 of the Act;
C & D debris               (p) “C & D debris” means materials not of a hazardous nature
                           which are normally used in the construction of buildings, structures,
                           roadways, walls and other landscaping material, and includes soil,
                           asphalt, brick, mortar, drywall, plaster, cellulose, fibreglass fibres,
                           gyproc, lumber, and wood but excludes chemically treated lumber
                           and wood;
C & D disposal site        (q) “C & D disposal site” means a construction and demolition
                           debris disposal site used for the disposal of C & D debris;
curing area                (r) “curing area” means an area where organic material that has
                           undergone the rapid initial stage of composting is further stabilized
                           into a mature finished compost;
Department                 (s) revoked by EC163/04;


                                                           2
Updated 2009            Environmental Protection Act               Cap. E-9                      3
                   Waste Resource Management Regulations


    (t) “food waste” means                                                    food waste
       (i) any residual vegetative waste other than leaf and yard
       materials or woody materials,
       (ii) residual waste of animal origin including meat, fish, bones,
       carcasses or shells but not including manure, and
       (iii) biosolids from residential, industrial, commercial or
       institutional sources;
    (u) “foreign matter” means any matter resulting from human                foreign matter
    intervention and made of organic or inorganic components including
    metal, glass and synthetic polymers that may be present in compost
    but foreign matter does not include mineral soils, woody material,
    and rocks;
    (u.1) “generator” means a person who has possession of hazardous          generator
    waste, other than household hazardous waste, immediately before
    the hazardous waste is transported;
    (v) “hazardous waste” means any waste material that                       hazardous waste
       (i) contains a toxic substance specified in the list of Toxic
       Substances pursuant to the Environmental Protection Act
       (Canada) Interprovincial Movement of Hazardous Waste
       Regulations, or
       (ii) has been listed as a hazardous substance pursuant to the
       Transportation of Dangerous Goods Act (Canada) or any
       regulations made pursuant to that Act;
    (w) “hazardous waste management facility” means a facility or place       hazardous waste
    operated for the purpose of treatment, disposal, recycling,               management facility

    reclamation, or storage of hazardous waste;
    (x) “industrial waste” means garbage, refuse, sludge, rubbish,            industrial waste
    tailings debris, litter and other discarded materials resulting from
    industrial or commercial activities requiring approval under section
    9 of the Act;
    (y) “in-vessel composting” means any composting method in which           in-vessel
    composting materials are contained in an enclosed reactor, vessel or      composting

    building and which utilizes forced ventilation with treatment of
    ventilation air for odour reduction;
    (z) “landfill” means a facility for the disposal of remaining waste;      landfill

    (aa) “leachate” means the fluid captured above the flexible               leachate
    membrane liner of a landfill;
    (bb) “leaf and yard waste” means vegetative matter resulting from         leaf and yard waste
    gardening, horticulture, landscaping or land clearing operation,
    including materials such as tree and shrub trimmings, plant remains,


                                    3
4                 Cap. E-9                 Environmental Protection Act          Updated 2009
                                      Waste Resource Management Regulations


                       grass clippings, leaves, trees and stumps, but excluding C & D
                       debris and contaminated organic matter;
lifespan               (cc) “lifespan” means the period of time in which a landfill,
                       composting facility, or C & D disposal site is in active operation
                       plus any subsequent period during which effects monitoring is
                       required;
manifest form          (dd) “manifest form” means the manifest form as set out in Schedule
                       D of these regulations;
open windrow           (ee) “open windrow composting” means composting in which
composting             compostable organic material is open to the atmosphere during the
                       composting process and includes windrow composting in a building
                       but where there is no treatment of ventilation air for odour
                       reduction;
receiver               (ee.1) “receiver” means a person who is in the business of receiving
                       hazardous waste from a generator, waste-generating facility or a
                       carrier;
recyclables            (ff) revoked by EC691/09;
remaining waste        (gg) “remaining waste” means any solid waste material that is not a
                       compostable or recyclable material and includes, but is not limited to
                         (i) toothbrushes and toothpaste tubes,
                         (ii) glass dishes,
                         (iii) ceramics,
                         (iv) light bulbs,
                         (v) pens, pencils, and crayons,
                         (vi) plastic food wrap,
                         (vii) vinyl, leather, and textiles,
                         (viii) plastic or metal cutlery,
                         (ix) styrofoam,
                         (x) plastics #6 and #7,
                         (xi) foil liners and bags, and
                         (xii) fly ash and boiler ash produced by the Trigen Energy From
                         Waste plant;
special waste          (gg.1) “special waste” includes
                         (i) asbestos-containing material,
                         (ii) metal-containing soils that pass a leachate test,
                         (iii) hydrocarbon-contaminated soils,
                         (iv) sharps such as needles, broken glass and other sharp objects
                         capable of causing cuts or punctures,
                         (v) burnable waste from ships and aircraft from outside the
                         province,
                         (vi) oil-soaked materials,


                                                       4
Updated 2009             Environmental Protection Act               Cap. E-9                         5
                    Waste Resource Management Regulations


       (vii) diseased potatoes from testing laboratories,
       (viii) empty ammonium nitrate fertilizer bags,
       (ix) screenings from a waste treatment plant,
       (x) non-hazardous laboratory waste,
       (xi) creosoted or pressure-treated material,
       (xii) biomass wet with a solvent,
       (xiii) absorbent materials and clothing contaminated with human
       or animal blood, tissue or bodily fluids produced from
          (A) surgical, medical or veterinary procedures in hospitals,
          medical centers or clinics, or veterinary hospitals or clinics, or
          (B) body-piercing procedures in tattoo or body-piercing
          establishments;
    (gg.2) “waste-generating facility” means an industry, factory,             waste-generating
    commercial business or institution, including a school or hospital, or     facility

    other place where hazardous waste, other than household hazardous
    waste, is generated;
    (hh) “waste incinerator fly ash” means the finely-divided particulate      waste incinerator
    matter, generated by the combustion of municipal solid waste, which        fly ash

    is captured for disposal;
    (hh.1) revoked by EC576/04. (EC691/00; 529/01; 163/04; 576/04;             waste manifest form
    691/09)

                        DISPOSAL OF WASTE
2. (1) No person shall dispose of                                              Prohibition
    (a) remaining waste;
    (b) compostable material; or
    (c) revoked by EC691/09;
    (d) special waste,
except at the appropriate landfill or composting facility approved to
accept each of these materials pursuant to these regulations.
  (2) Subject to section 59, no person shall dispose of C & D debris           Prohibition, C & D
except at a C & D disposal site operated in accordance with these              disposal sites

regulations.
  (3) No person shall own, construct, manage, operate, alter or modify         Approval, landfill,
    (a) a landfill;                                                            etc.

    (b) an ash disposal site; or
    (c) a composting facility which can process more than 60 cubic
    metres of compost annually
except where
    (d) approval for the undertaking has been obtained from the
    Minister; and


                                     5
6                     Cap. E-9                 Environmental Protection Act           Updated 2009
                                          Waste Resource Management Regulations


                           (e) a permit authorizing the undertaking has been issued to the
                           person by the Minister.
Approval, C & D
disposal sites          (4) Subject to section 59, no person shall own, construct, manage,
                      operate, alter or modify a C & D disposal site except where
                          (a) approval for the undertaking has been obtained from the
                          Minister; and
                          (b) a permit authorizing the undertaking has been issued to the
                          person by the Minister.
Farm composting         (5) Clause (1)(b) does not apply to composting undertaken in
                      accordance with normal farm practices and Codes of Practice established
                      pursuant to the Farm Practices Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap. F-4.1.
Prohibition - waste     (6) No person shall dispose of waste incinerator fly ash except at an
incinerator fly ash   approved hazardous waste management facility.
Fee & revocation of     (7) The Minister may
permit                    (a) charge an annual fee for any approval or permit sought pursuant
                          to this section; and
                          (b) revoke, at any time, any permit issued pursuant to this section
                          where, in the opinion of the Minister, the person to whom the permit
                          is issued is not in compliance with these regulations. (EC691/00;
                          50/01; 163/04; 691/09)
Requirements          2.1 (1) No carrier, receiver, generator or person who operates a waste-
                      generating facility shall transport hazardous waste off the site at which it
                      was produced, unless the carrier, receiver, generator or person who
                      operates a waste-generating facility
                           (a) is registered and issued a provincial registration number under
                           subsection (4); and
                           (b) completes a manifest form, as set out in Schedule D of these
                           regulations, prior to transporting the hazardous waste off the site at
                           which it was produced.
Application             (2) A carrier, receiver, generator or person who operates a waste-
                      generating facility who wishes to be registered for the transport of
                      hazardous waste off the site at which it was produced, shall
                          (a) apply to the Minister to be registered on the form approved by
                          the Minister; and
                          (b) pay the fee of $100.
Information             (3) An applicant under subsection (1) shall provide such other
                      information as the Minster may require and shall keep the Minister
                      informed of any changes of address or other pertinent information.




                                                           6
Updated 2009             Environmental Protection Act              Cap. E-9                     7
                    Waste Resource Management Regulations


  (4) The Minister may register and issue a provincial registration
                                                                              Provincial ID
number to an applicant under this section.                                    number
                                                                              Requirements
  (5) Every carrier, receiver, generator or person who operates a waste-
generating facility shall
    (a) retain a copy of the manifest form, completed pursuant to
    subsection (1), for at least two years, for every shipment of
    hazardous waste transported or received by the carrier, receiver or
    person who operates a waste-generating facility;
    (b) send or cause to be sent a copy of the original manifest form,
    completed pursuant to subsection (1), to the department responsible
    for the environment in the originating province and to the
    destination province of the hazardous waste; and
    (c) ensure that any copies of a manifest form that are required to be
    retained or sent to a department under this subsection are complete
    and show all of the information contained in the original manifest
    form completed pursuant to subsection (1).
   (6) Subsection (1) does not apply to a carrier, receiver, generator or     Application of
person who operates a waste-generating facility in respect of the             subsection (1)

transportation of hazardous waste off the site at which it was produced if
the carrier, receiver, generator or person who operates a waste-
generating facility
     (a) transports the hazardous waste to a destination outside the
     province for recycling; and
     (b) holds an applicable permit of Equivalent Level of Safety issued
     by Environment Canada. (EC163/04; 576/04)

                  REMAINING WASTE LANDFILL
3. Applications for an approval to construct or operate a landfill shall be   Application for
accompanied by                                                                approval

    (a) a report detailing information required by sections 4 to 30 of
    these regulations;
    (b) any other supporting documentation the Minister may require.
    (EC691/00)

               LANDFILL DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION
4. (1) All of the components, systems, and features of every landfill         Minimum standards
shall be
     (a) designed to function over the lifespan of the landfill; and
     (b) of a demonstrable technology.




                                     7
8                      Cap. E-9                 Environmental Protection Act          Updated 2009
                                           Waste Resource Management Regulations


                         (2) Alternatives to the landfill components, systems, and features
Alternative
technology
                       described in these regulations may be employed where they are based on
                       improved technologies or on changing waste characteristics.
Alternative design
                          (3) Where the corporation proposes an alternative design to the
                       minimum standard, it shall be the responsibility of the corporation to
                       demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Minister that the proposed
                       alternative design is capable of achieving an equivalent or higher level of
                       protection than the minimum standards. (EC691/00)
General landfill       5. All landfills shall be designed to incorporate the components,
requirements           systems, and features required by sections 6 to 30. (EC691/00)

                                            LANDFILL LINER SYSTEM
Bearing capacity       6. (1) The subbase of the landfill liner system shall be composed of
                       material of sufficient bearing capacity to support the material to be
                       placed above it during the lifespan of the landfill.
Insufficient bearing     (2) Where material is encountered in the subbase which does not meet
capacity               the bearing capacity, the material shall be excavated and replaced by the
                       corporation with appropriate structural fill material of sufficient bearing
                       capacity. (EC691/00)
Compacted clay         7. (1) Every compacted clay liner component of the landfill liner system
liner component        shall
                            (a) be protected during and after construction from damage due to
                            frost, desiccation, over-hydration, differential movement and impact;
                            (b) be no less than 1,000 mm in depth;
                            (c) be placed in uniform, horizontal lifts of approximately 150 mm
                            maximum loose thickness and constructed to ensure that the
                            minimum hydraulic conductivity of the compacted soil is 1 x 10-7
                            cm/sec or less; and
                            (d) be installed in accordance with the requirements set out in
                            Schedule C.
Testing                  (2) The corporation shall submit test results to the Department in order
                       to ensure the compacted clay liner meets the requirements of subsection
                       (1).
Cost of testing          (3) The testing required by subsection (2) shall be
                           (a) undertaken by a testing agency approved by the Minister; and
                           (b) paid for by the corporation.
Modification             (4) The compacted clay liner may be modified, if required, with an
                       admixture such as bentonite clay in order to achieve the required
                       hydraulic conductivity.


                                                            8
Updated 2009             Environmental Protection Act             Cap. E-9                     9
                    Waste Resource Management Regulations


  (5) Where a compacted clay liner is modified pursuant to subsection
                                                                             Uniform
(4), the hydraulic conductivity shall be uniform throughout the entire       conductivity
thickness of the soil. (EC691/00)
                                                                             Flexible membrane
8. The flexible membrane liner component of the compacted clay liner         liner component
shall be
     (a) manufactured of a high density polyethylene of a minimum 80
     mil thickness; and
     (b) installed in accordance with the conditions set out in Schedule
     C. (EC691/00; 529/01)
9. The leachate collection system shall                                      Leachate collection
    (a) be able to convey all of the leachate to a common point for          system

    treatment as required;
    (b) have a hydraulic conductivity of 1 x 10-3 cm/sec or greater;
    (c) be sloped so that it can adequately drain the leachate;
    (d) be provided with adequate protection above the leachate
    collection system to prevent clogging of the leachate collection
    system; and
    (e) not exceed a depth of 300 mm or less of leachate head on all
    portions of the liner, excluding the leachate sumps, during routine
    operations. (EC691/00)
10. (1) The various components of a leachate collection and removal          Standards for
system shall                                                                 components

     (a) be chemically compatible with the anticipated waste and leachate
     characteristics;
     (b) provide access for inspection, monitoring flow, monitoring head,
     controlling flow and cleaning;
     (c) maintain integrity under both dynamic and static loading events
     for all phases of landfill development;
     (d) contain geosynthetic fabrics that are specified on the basis of
     calculations which incorporate the leachate generation and flow
     rates anticipated to occur during the operating and post-closure
     phases of the facility; and
     (e) be designed to prevent the passage of fines in the leachate
     collection and piping systems as well as to mitigate or eliminate the
     effects of any material capable of reducing the hydraulic flow
     capacity of the leachate collection and piping systems.
  (2) Recirculation of leachate shall be limited to emergency operations     Recirculation
and shall be in accordance with the provisions of a contingency plan
approved by the Department.




                                     9
10                   Cap. E-9                 Environmental Protection Act           Updated 2009
                                         Waste Resource Management Regulations


                       (3) Tanks, sumps, or other storage units associated with leachate
Alarms
                     collection and removal systems shall be equipped with high-level alarms.
                     (EC691/00)
Standards for        11. Collection pipes shall
collection pipes         (a) be a minimum of 150 mm diameter DR35 PVC having 12 mm
                         perforations at the four and eight o’clock positions with perforations
                         spaced a maximum of 150 mm center to center;
                         (b) not require solvent welding;
                         (c) where the collection pipes penetrate liners, be designed to
                         prevent leakage and accommodate landfill settlement;
                         (d) be designed to carry the peak leachate flow and shall have a
                         minimum slope of 1% and a minimum flow velocity of 0.3 m/s;
                         (e) have sufficient wall thickness and bedding to accommodate all
                         static and dynamic loads incurred during construction and operation;
                         (f) where the collection pipe is a perforated (lateral) collector pipe,
                         have a minimum spacing of 45 m within any tributary cell area;
                         (g) where the collection pipe is an unperforated primary (main)
                         collector pipe, be provided with manholes at
                             (i) a maximum of 150 m spacing,
                             (ii) at changes in direction and grade, and
                             (iii) at junctions with secondary collector pipes from all tributary
                             cell areas;
                         (h) be installed with a drop of 300 mm between a secondary
                         collector pipe entering a manhole and the primary collector pipe;
                         and
                         (i) be installed with a minimum drop of 50 mm across primary flows
                         through manholes. (EC691/00)
Standards for        12. All manholes shall
manholes                 (a) be a minimum of 1.2 m in diameter with precast and benched
                         bases and inlet and outlet holes precast and gasketed;
                         (b) have lifting holes grouted and joints sealed with gaskets;
                         (c) be provided with a cast iron cover and frame grouted to the
                         manhole top;
                         (d) where the manhole is over 2 m in depth, be fitted with
                         galvanized steel ladders;
                         (e) extend 150 mm above the finished grade. (EC691/00)
Pump stations        13. (1) Pump stations may be used to extract or transfer leachate where
                          (a) gravity systems are not feasible; and
                          (b) the use of a pump station has been approved by the Department.
Standards for pump     (2) Where a pump station has been approved pursuant to subsection
stations             (1), the pump station shall



                                                          10
Updated 2009             Environmental Protection Act              Cap. E-9                     11
                    Waste Resource Management Regulations


    (a) be designed so as to limit unnecessary perforation of liners by
    collector pipes or forcemains;
    (b) be equipped with intrinsically safe or explosion proof equipment;
    (c) be equipped with manually initiated two speed fans to ventilate
    wet walls, accessible for maintenance purposes;
    (d) be mechanically ventilated at 5 volume changes per hour and 10
    volume changes per hour on high speed;
    (e) meet the requirements of the Environmental Protection Act
    Sewage Disposal Regulations (EC298/97);
    (f) be designed to prevent overflow of leachate during station
    failure;
    (g) be installed in a lined excavation;
    (h) have a chamber that is pressure tested to twice the maximum
    achievable leachate level if the pump station is lying outside of the
    fill material and liner;
    (i) be constructed of materials that are corrosion resistant or readily
    replaceable for all infrastructure exposed to leachate or leachate
    gases; and
    (j) have forcemains of plastic materials such as PVC or polyethylene
    with a wall thickness capable of withstanding anticipated pressures,
    with joints tested for leaks at twice the maximum surge pressure
    before the forcemain is put into place. (EC691/00)
14. (1) A minimum 450 mm thick cushion layer shall be placed above            Cushion layer
the leachate collection layer.
  (2) The cushion layer shall be of structural fill material capable of       Separation
separating the waste material from the leachate collection layer.
   (3) Waste material, free of large or long objects which could cause        Placement of waste
stress to the liner, shall be placed above the cushion collection layer.      material

(EC691/00)
15. The purpose of the landfill final cover system is to                      Landfill final cover
    (a) control the amount of surface water infiltration into the buried      system

    waste material;
    (b) limit erosion and sedimentation;
    (c) control the release of methane gas from the landfill; and
    (d) protect the underlying waste from exposure. (EC691/00)
16. The landfill final cover system shall consist of                          Requirements
    (a) a grading pad;
    (b) a low hydraulic conductivity layer; and
    (c) a vegetative layer. (EC691/00)
17. The grading pad of the landfill final cover system shall                  Grading pad interim
                                                                              cover pad



                                     11
12                    Cap. E-9                 Environmental Protection Act          Updated 2009
                                          Waste Resource Management Regulations


                           (a) be a minimum of 300 mm thick;
                           (b) consist of structural fill material capable of supporting the
                           material above; and
                           (c) allow for the lateral movement of gases. (EC691/00)
Low hydraulic
conductivity layer    18. The low hydraulic conductivity layer of the landfill final cover
                      system shall
                           (a) be designed to limit the surface water infiltration into the waste
                           material; and
                           (b) consist of either a flexible membrane liner manufactured of a
                           low density polyethylene of a minimum 40 mil thickness or an
                           equivalent flexible membrane liner approved by the Minister.
                           (EC691/00)
Vegetative layer      19. The vegetative layer of the landfill final cover system shall
                          (a) serve to stabilize the final cover system from the forces of wind
                          and water erosion;
                          (b) provide a low-maintenance surface; and
                          (c) consist of a minimum of 300 mm of topsoil with a vegetative
                          surface. (EC691/00)
Settling              20. All components of the landfill final cover system shall be designed
                      to accommodate settling and consolidation of the waste material below
                      so that ponding of water does not occur on the surface. (EC691/00)
Leachate              21. (1) The leachate management system shall consist of infrastructure
management system     and monitoring systems designed to monitor, control and treat leachate
                      prior to discharge into the surrounding environment.
Requirements            (2) Every leachate management system shall
                          (a) have a leachate collection and removal network from the waste
                          burial portion of the landfill which shall be hydraulically separated
                          from the landfill’s storm water system;
                          (b) function year round;
                          (c) function effectively during the lifespan of the landfill;
                          (d) have a means of monitoring all leachate flow;
                          (e) record both instantaneous and total flows; and
                          (f) have adequate storage capacity.
Contaminants            (3) All leachate shall be treated to remove contaminants prior to
                      discharge into the environment and tested in accordance with the
                      parameters set out in Schedule A.
Discharge standards    (4) The discharge standards for all leachate shall be determined by the
                      Minister based on
                         (a) the background water quality in the receiving water;
                         (b) identified current and projected uses of the receiving water;


                                                           12
Updated 2009             Environmental Protection Act                Cap. E-9                       13
                    Waste Resource Management Regulations


    (c) the Canadian Environmental Quality Guidelines;
    (d) any other environmental quality standards or guidelines deemed
    appropriate by the Minister.
                                                                                Leachates
  (5) The corporation shall ensure that leachates are not acutely lethal as
determined by the Environment Canada Rainbow Trout Acute Lethality
Test (Reference Method EPS-1/RM/13, July, 1990). (EC691/00)
22. (1) Landfill gas production shall be managed to control the                 Landfill gas
discharge of potentially dangerous gases into the atmosphere.                   management system


 (2) Venting or gas collection systems shall be installed to control and        Venting
monitor the gas production in the landfill.
  (3) All new landfills shall be assessed for the viability of energy           Energy recovery
recovery from gas production. (EC691/00)
23. (1) Surface water management systems shall                                  Surface water
    (a) divert surface and storm water from the disposal areas of the           management system

    landfill;
    (b) control run-off discharge from the landfill;
    (c) control erosion, sedimentation, siltration, and flooding;
    (d) minimize the generation of leachate; and
    (e) be tested in order to ensure compliance with the parameters set
    out in Schedule A.
  (2) All surface water management systems shall be hydraulically               Separation
separate from the landfill’s leachate management systems. (EC691/00)
24. (1) The seasonal high elevation of groundwater shall be maintained          Groundwater
at a minimum of 500 mm below the lowest point of the compacted clay             management system

liner.
  (2) Groundwater lowering systems shall provide for positive drainage          Positive drainage
of the groundwater away from the landfill area. (EC691/00)
25. (1) The groundwater monitoring system for landfills shall be                Groundwater
approved by the Minister and shall consist of                                   monitoring system

    (a) at least one groundwater monitoring well installed hydraulically
    above the gradient of the landfill, and at least three monitoring wells
    installed hydraulically below the gradient direction; and
    (b) a monitoring well system containing a sufficient number of
    multi-level well nests for measurement of vertical gradients.
  (2) Locations of the monitoring wells required by subsection (1) shall        Location of
be sufficiently close to the active disposal area to allow early detection of   monitoring wells

contamination and implementation of remedial measures.



                                     13
14                   Cap. E-9                 Environmental Protection Act         Updated 2009
                                         Waste Resource Management Regulations


                       (3) All monitoring wells required by subsection (1) shall be retained
Duration of
monitoring
                     throughout the lifespan of the landfill and tested in accordance with the
                     parameters set out in Schedule A. (EC691/00)
Disposal material
monitoring           26. (1) All landfills and composting facilities approved after the coming
                     into force of these regulations, and the East Prince Waste Management
                     Facility - Wellington Center, shall have a monitoring station and
                     monitoring systems in place to
                          (a) enable inspection of material received by the landfill or
                          composting facility; and
                          (b) ensure compliance with the corporation’s Program Policies.
Inspection station     (2) All landfills and composting facilities approved after the coming
                     into force of these regulations, and the East Prince Waste Management
                     Facility - Wellington Center, shall have an inspection station and weigh
                     scales, provided by and maintained by the corporation, at the entrance to
                     the landfill or composting facility.
Weigh scales           (3) The scales required by subsection (2) shall provide for accurate
                     weighing of the material to be buried or separated, according to Weights
                     and Measures Canada Standards, (EC691/00)
Separation           27. (1) The distance between the active disposal area of a landfill and
distances            the nearest residential, institutional, commercial or industrial building
                     shall be a minimum of 750 m.
Property boundary      (2) The distance between the active disposal area of a landfill and the
                     nearest property boundary shall be a minimum of 100 m.
Water                  (3) The distance between the active disposal area and the nearest bank
                     top or high water mark of any surface watercourse or body of water,
                     including salt water, or to any off-site well shall be a minimum of 100 m.
                     (EC691/00)
Quality control      28. (1) The corporation shall provide to the Minister a description of the
programs             quality control programs to be carried out on all aspects of the landfill
                     system and materials.
Quality control         (2) For specific items including, but not limited to, flexible membrane
                     liners and low hydraulic conductivity soil components, quality control
                     shall be carried out by an independent third party approved by the
                     Minister to ensure that the materials are manufactured and installed as
                     specified and in accordance with generally accepted practices and
                     tolerances. (EC691/00)
Landfill operation   29. Operation of a landfill shall incorporate, as a minimum, the
requirements         following operational requirements:


                                                          14
Updated 2009             Environmental Protection Act              Cap. E-9                   15
                    Waste Resource Management Regulations


    (a) placement of cover over all exposed remaining waste at least
    once each day or more often as required;
    (b) constant supervision during the hours that the landfill is open;
    (c) inspection of all loads prior to unloading;
    (d) acceptance of only the material identified in the approval of the
    application to operate the landfill;
    (e) control and recovery of litter;
    (f) stabilization of exposed areas to prevent erosion and
    sedimentation;
    (g) control of dust;
    (h) control of vectors; and
    (i) placement of appropriate signage at the entrance to the landfill
    which shall indicate the name of the landfill, hours of operation,
    emergency contact, and the materials acceptable for disposal at the
    landfill. (EC691/00)
30. (1) The corporation shall submit an Operation and Maintenance             Operation and
Manual for every landfill owned by the corporation which shall include        Maintenance
                                                                              Manuals
the following:
     (a) record drawings and specifications for the landfill;
     (b) a copy of the approval including terms and conditions contained
     in the approval for the landfill, and any amendments to the approval;
     (c) a complete description of the operational requirements;
     (d) monitoring logs including, but not limited to, monitoring well
     logs, leachate treatment records, gas management records,
     household hazardous materials handling records, ozone depletion
     materials renewal records and storm water management records;
     (e) contingency plans as required by section 31;
     (f) copies of all report forms that are to be used at the site; and
     (g) disposal records which include the generator, for single
     generator loads, and carrier for the materials.
  (2) The Operation and Maintenance Manuals shall be left on the              Inspection
landfill premises at all times and shall be available for inspection during
operating hours.
  (3) The Operation and Maintenance Manual shall be submitted to the          Approval
Minister for approval at least 30 days prior to commencement of
operations. (EC691/00)
31. The corporation shall provide a contingency plan that                     Contingency plan
    (a) identifies all reasonably foreseeable emergencies, including fire,
    explosion, leachate leakage, spills, and bomb threats; and
    (b) describes appropriate remedial measures required to prevent
    damage to the landfill and the surroundings. (EC691/00)



                                     15
16                    Cap. E-9                 Environmental Protection Act           Updated 2009
                                          Waste Resource Management Regulations


                      32. (1) The corporation shall ensure that records of the operation are
Reports and records
                      completed daily and made available for inspection at all times.
Content
                        (2) The corporation shall submit a written report to the Minister on or
                      before June 30 of each year for the immediately preceding fiscal year
                      ending March 31, regarding the following items:
                          (a) the results of leachate monitoring both pre-treatment and post-
                          treatment including
                             (i) total flows, peak and average flows, and
                             (ii) leachate quality;
                          (b) the results of gas production monitoring including total
                          production, peak and average for landfills with landfill gas
                          management systems;
                          (c) the results of surface water monitoring and groundwater
                          monitoring;
                          (d) waste flow including
                             (i) types of materials accepted at the landfill for the period,
                             (ii) quantities of materials accepted at the landfill for the period,
                             (iii) quantities of materials buried,
                             (iv) quantities of materials separated for reuse and recycling.
                             (EC691/00)
Landfill closure      33. (1) The corporation shall include, in the application for approval, a
plan                  preliminary closure plan for the landfill.
Idem, content           (2) The closure plan shall include the following:
                          (a) the anticipated date of closure;
                          (b) a description of waste that will remain as part of the closed
                          landfill;
                          (c) a description of all post-closure control and monitoring
                          programs which will be carried out at the landfill and the length of
                          time they will be carried out;
                          (d) a description of any decommissioning of components of the
                          landfill;
                          (e) a closure schedule; and
                          (f) any other information required by the Minister. (EC691/00)
Notification          34. At least 180 days prior to the planned closure of a landfill, the
                      corporation shall
                          (a) notify the Minister in writing of the intent to close the landfill;
                          and
                          (b) include a detailed description of the final closure plan.
                          (EC691/00)




                                                           16
Updated 2009             Environmental Protection Act               Cap. E-9                      17
                    Waste Resource Management Regulations


                      COMPOSTING FACILITIES
35. (1) Sections 36 to 58 apply to all composting facilities requiring         Application
approval pursuant to section 2.
                                                                               Idem
  (2) Sections 36 to 58 do not apply to
    (a) backyard composting;
    (b) composting undertaken according to normal farm practices and
    Codes of Practice established pursuant to the Farm Practices Act;
    and
    (c) the processing of fish waste and sewage sludge at facilities
    approved by the Minister. (EC691/00)
36. (1) No person shall construct or operate a compost facility unless         Applications for
approval has been granted by the Minister.                                     approval


  (2) Unless specifically exempted by the Minister, the corporation is to      Information
provide all information necessary to satisfy the requirements of sections
36 to 58. (EC691/00)
37. (1) Composting facilities receiving under 10,000 tonnes of                 Composting
compostables per year shall incorporate the following requirements:            facilities under
                                                                               10,000 tonnes
       (a) systems designed to minimize odour generation;
       (b) measures to control and treat leachate and storm runoff and
       prevent groundwater contamination;
       (c) a groundwater and surface water monitoring plan approved
       by the Minister; and
       (d) removal of by-products, including residuals from the site, in a
       timely manner and disposal thereof in a manner acceptable to the
       Minister.
  (2) Composting facilities receiving under 10,000 tonnes of                   Separation
compostables per year shall have the following separation distances:           distances, facilities
                                                                               under 10,000 tonnes
    (a) the distance between the active area and the nearest foundation
    of an off-site structure used for commercial, industrial, residential or
    institutional purposes shall be a minimum of 500 m;
    (b) the distance between the active area and the nearest property
    boundary shall be a minimum of 30 m; and
    (c) the distance between the active area and the nearest watercourse
    or body of water, including salt water, shall be a minimum of 30 m.
    (EC691/00)

               IN-VESSEL COMPOSTING FACILITIES
38. (1) The receiving and tipping areas of in-vessel composting                In-vessel
facilities shall be underlain by an impermeable pad, the surface of which      composting
                                                                               facilities
shall be concrete or asphalt.


                                     17
18                    Cap. E-9                 Environmental Protection Act          Updated 2009
                                          Waste Resource Management Regulations


                         (2) All drainage from the impermeable pad shall be collected for
Drainage from
impermeable pad
                      treatment or for return to the process.
Enclosed structure
                        (3) The receiving and tipping area shall be in an enclosed structure.
                      (EC691/00)
Composting area       39. (1) The composting areas of in-vessel composting facilities shall be
                      designed to fully contain the compostable organic material and all
                      leachate which may be generated.
Containment system      (2) The containment system shall be impermeable, and the surface of
                      the containment system shall be constructed of concrete, asphalt, steel, or
                      other material as approved by the Minister.
Drainage                 (3) All drainage from the composting area shall be collected for
                      treatment or for return to the process. (EC691/00)
Curing area           40. (1) The curing area of in-vessel composting facilities shall be
                      underlain by an impermeable pad, the surface of which shall be concrete
                      or asphalt.
Drainage                 (2) All drainage from the impermeable pad shall be collected for
                      treatment or for return to the process.
Roof                    (3) All curing areas shall utilize permanent roof structures or other
                      proven management techniques to control moisture and minimize odour
                      and leachate generation. (EC691/00)
Leachate              41. (1) Leachate management systems for in-vessel composting
management            facilities shall be developed which shall consist of infrastructure and
systems
                      monitoring systems designed to
                           (a) collect;
                           (b) monitor;
                           (c) control; and
                           (d) treat
                      leachate prior to being discharged into the surrounding environment.
Requirements            (2) Leachate management systems shall
                          (a) have a leachate collection and removal network in the active
                          area;
                          (b) function year round; and
                          (c) have a means of monitoring all treated leachate discharges.
Discharge standards    (3) The discharge standards for all leachate shall be determined by the
                      Minister based on
                         (a) the background water quality in the receiving water;
                         (b) identified current and projected uses of the receiving water;
                         (c) the Canadian Environmental Quality Guidelines; and


                                                           18
Updated 2009             Environmental Protection Act              Cap. E-9                     19
                    Waste Resource Management Regulations


    (d) any other environmental quality standards or guidelines deemed
    appropriate by the Minister.
                                                                              Biological test
   (4) The corporation shall ensure that leachate shall not be acutely        methods
lethal as determined by the Environment Canada Rainbow Trout Acute
Lethality Test (Reference Method EPS-1/RM/13, July, 1990).
(EC691/00)
42. (1) The corporation shall submit, for approval from the Minister, a       Surface water
surface water monitoring program for in-vessel composting facilities.         management


  (2) The extent of surface water monitoring requirements will be based       Extent
on the design of the composting facility.
  (3) The surface water monitoring program shall                              Surface water
    (a) divert surface and storm water from the active areas;                 monitoring program

    (b) control run-off discharge from the composting facility;
    (c) control erosion, sedimentation, siltration, and flooding; and
    (d) minimize the generation of leachate. (EC691/00)
43. (1) The corporation shall submit, for approval from the Minister, a       Groundwater
groundwater monitoring program for in-vessel composting facilities.           management


  (2) The extent of groundwater monitoring requirements will be based         Extent
on the design of the composting facility.
  (3) Where any of the active area is not protected from precipitation        Requirements
with permanently constructed roof structures, the groundwater                 where no roof

monitoring program shall include
    (a) at least one groundwater monitoring well installed hydraulically
    above the gradient of the active area and at least three monitoring
    wells installed hydraulically below the gradient direction;
    (b) a monitoring well system including a sufficient number of multi-
    level well nests for measurement of vertical gradients.
  (4) The location of every monitoring well required by subsection (3)        Location of
shall be sufficiently close to the active area to allow early detection of    monitoring

contamination and implementation of remedial measures.
  (5) Every monitoring well required by subsection (3) shall be retained      Duration of
throughout the lifespan of the composting facility. (EC691/00)                monitoring


44. (1) Mechanical ventilators for in-vessel composting facilities shall      Odour control
be provided for the composting area, areas for the storage of                 systems

compostable organic feedstock and any other area containing readily
putrescible materials such as the storage room for residuals.




                                     19
20                   Cap. E-9                Environmental Protection Act         Updated 2009
                                        Waste Resource Management Regulations


                       (2) All areas referred to in subsection (1) shall be under a negative
Negative pressure
                     atmospheric pressure in order to avoid the escape of odours.
Ventilation air
                       (3) All ventilation air shall be subject to a treatment system designed
                     to remove odours prior to release into the environment.
Aeration system        (4) The corporation shall provide a building ventilation system with a
                     capacity for at least 12 air exchanges per hour in every active
                     composting area. (EC691/00)
Separation           45. (1) The distance between the active area of an in-vessel composting
distances            facility and the nearest residential or institutional building shall be a
                     minimum of 500 m.
Distances,             (2) The distance between the active area and the nearest commercial
commercial,          or industrial building shall be a minimum of 250 m.
industrial

Property boundary      (3) The distance between the active area and the nearest property
                     boundary shall be a minimum of 100 m .
Water course or        (4) The distance between the active area and the nearest watercourse
body                 or body of water, including salt water, shall be a minimum of 50 m.
                     (EC691/00)

                                OPEN WINDROW COMPOSTING FACILITIES
Receiving and        46. (1) The receiving and tipping area of open windrow composting
tipping area         facilities shall be underlain by an impermeable pad, the surface of which
                     shall be concrete or asphalt.
Drainage                (2) All drainage from the impermeable pad shall be collected for
                     treatment or for return to the process.
Enclosed structure     (3) The receiving and tipping area shall be in an enclosed structure.
                     (EC691/00)
Composting area      47. (1) The composting areas of open windrow composting facilities
                     shall be underlain by an impermeable pad, the surface of which shall be
                     concrete or asphalt.
Drainage                (2) All drainage from the impermeable pad shall be collected for
                     treatment or for return to the process.
Enclosed structure     (3) All composting areas shall utilize permanent roof structures or
                     proven management techniques in order to control moisture and to
                     minimize odour and leachate generation. (EC691/00)




                                                         20
Updated 2009             Environmental Protection Act             Cap. E-9                   21
                    Waste Resource Management Regulations


48. (1) The curing areas of open windrow composting facilities shall be
                                                                             Curing area
underlain by an impermeable pad, the surface of which shall be concrete
or asphalt.
                                                                             Drainage
   (2) All drainage from the impermeable pad shall be collected for
treatment or for return to the process.
  (3) All curing areas shall utilize permanent roof structures or proven     Odour and leachate
management techniques to control moisture and to minimize odour and
leachate generation. (EC691/00)
49. Surface water management systems of open windrow composting              Surface water
facilities shall                                                             management

     (a) divert surface and storm water from the active areas;
     (b) control run-off discharge from the open windrow composting
     facility;
     (c) control erosion, sedimentation, siltration, and flooding; and
     (d) minimize the generation of leachate. (EC691/00)
50. (1) Every open windrow composting facility shall undertake a             Groundwater
groundwater monitoring program consisting of                                 monitoring program

    (a) at least one groundwater monitoring well installed hydraulically
    above the gradient of the active area, and at least three monitoring
    wells installed hydraulically below the gradient direction; and
    (b) a monitoring well system including a sufficient number of multi-
    level well nests for measurement of vertical gradients.
  (2) The location of every monitoring well required by subsection (1)       Location of
shall be sufficiently close to the active area to allow early detection of   monitoring

contamination and implementation of remedial measures.
  (3) Every monitoring well required by subsection (1) shall be retained     Duration of
throughout the lifespan of the composting facility. (EC691/00)               monitoring


51. (1) The corporation shall provide the Minister with detailed             Odour control
management techniques for the control of odours from the composting
process of every open windrow composting facility owned by the
corporation.
  (2) All open windrow facilities which                                      Atmospheric
     (a) include more than 1,000 tonnes annually of food waste in their      dispersion
                                                                             modelling
     feedstock; or
     (b) exceed 10,000 tonnes annually of total feedstock,
shall provide atmospheric dispersion modelling to determine the
potential for odour at the property boundary and other receptors near the
open windrow composting facility.



                                     21
22                    Cap. E-9                 Environmental Protection Act         Updated 2009
                                          Waste Resource Management Regulations


                        (3) The modelling shall
Modelling
                          (a) categorize the compounds which could result in odour; and
                          (b) establish odour concentrations at the property boundaries and
                          other receptors.
Baseline odour
concentrations          (4) Baseline odour concentrations of open windrow composting
                      facilities described in subsection (2) shall meet the requirements of the
                      Minister and shall be used in testing for odours after the open windrow
                      composting facility is in operation. (EC691/00)
Separation            52. (1) The distance between the active area of open windrow
distances             composting facilities and the nearest structure, including residential,
                      institutional, commercial or industrial buildings, shall be a minimum of
                      500 m.
Exception - food        (2) Where the open windrow composting facility
waste, feedstock           (a) includes more than 1,000 tonnes annually of food waste in its
                           feedstock; or
                           (b) exceeds 10,000 tonnes annually of total feedstock,
                      the separation distance shall be a minimum of 1,000 m.
Property boundary       (3) The distance between the active area of an open windrow
                      composting facility and the nearest property boundary shall be a
                      minimum of 100 m.
Watercourse             (4) The distance between the active area and the nearest watercourse
                      or body of water, including salt water, shall be a minimum of 30 m.
                      (EC691/00)
Composting facility   53. (1) Subject to subsection (2), the corporation shall ensure that every
objective             composting facility operated by the corporation incorporates all
                      compostable organic feedstock into the composting process the same day
                      that it is delivered to the site.
Feedstock               (2) Where feedstock, except leaf and yard waste feedstock, is not
                      incorporated into the composting process in the same day it is received at
                      the composting facility, it shall be stored in an enclosed area with a
                      mechanical system for the capture and treatment of odorous emissions.
Supervision             (3) Every composting facility shall have constant supervision during
                      the hours that it is open.
Approved feedstock      (4) Every composting facility shall accept only the feedstock
                      identified in the approval.
Residual products       (5) Any residual products associated with the composting operation
                      shall be disposed of by the corporation in a manner acceptable to the
                      Minister.


                                                           22
Updated 2009             Environmental Protection Act                Cap. E-9                   23
                    Waste Resource Management Regulations


  (6) Litter shall be controlled on the entire composting facility site.
                                                                                Litter
  (7) Exposed areas shall be stabilized to prevent erosion and                  Exposed areas
sedimentation.
                                                                                Dust
  (8) Dust particulate emission shall meet the Ministerial requirements
for particulate emissions as prescribed by the Environmental Protection
Act Air Quality Regulations (EC377/92).
  (9) Vectors shall be controlled in accordance with a control plan             Vectors
approved by the Minister.
  (10) Signs shall be placed at the entrance to the site indicating the         Signs
name of the facility, hours of operation, emergency contact, and the
materials acceptable at the site. (EC691/00)

               COMPOST REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
54. (1) The corporation shall submit an Operation and Maintenance               Operation and
Manual for every composting facility owned by the corporation which             Maintenance
                                                                                Manual
shall include the following:
     (a) record drawings and specifications for the composting facility;
     (b) a copy of the approval including terms and conditions of the
     approval for the composting facility;
     (c) a complete description of the operational practices and
     procedures;
     (d) a description of measures to control and monitor the aeration of
     the compost to ensure that the oxygen content in the compost
     material is sufficient to prevent the composting mass from becoming
     anaerobic;
     (e) a description of measures to control the aeration, blending and
     mixing of the compost to minimize odorous emissions from the
     composting operation as well as raw material and compost storage;
     (f) a description of monitoring programs including sampling
     protocols, locations and frequency for monitoring wells, leachate
     treatment and storm water management systems; and
     (g) contingency plans as required by subsection 55(1).
  (2) The Operation and Maintenance Manual shall be left on site at all         Inspection
times and shall be available for inspection during operating hours.
  (3) The Operation and Maintenance Manual shall be submitted to the            Approval
Minister for approval at least 30 days prior to commencement of
operation. (EC691/00)
55. (1) Contingency plans for composting facilities shall identify all          Contingency plans
reasonably foreseeable emergencies including fire, explosion, leachate


                                     23
24               Cap. E-9                 Environmental Protection Act           Updated 2009
                                     Waste Resource Management Regulations


                 leakage or spills and shall describe appropriate responses to prevent an
                 adverse affect on the surrounding environment.
Contents
                   (2) The corporation shall provide contingency plans addressing
                 problems associated with vectors, groundwater contamination,
                 equipment failure, odour generation, and complaints. (EC691/00)
Monitoring       56. (1) The type and frequency of monitoring and reporting
                 requirements for composting facilities shall be specified in the terms and
                 conditions of the approval.
Annual report      (2) The corporation shall submit for Ministerial approval an annual
                 report which shall include the following information:
                     (a) surface water monitoring and groundwater monitoring quality
                     data;
                     (b) feedstock flow including
                        (i) types of materials accepted at the composting facility for the
                        period,
                        (ii) quantities of materials accepted at the composting facility for
                        the period;
                     (c) quantities of materials composted;
                     (d) quantities of materials rejected and sent for disposal;
                     (e) compost quality testing results; and
                     (f) complaint records.
Log book re        (3) The corporation shall record and respond to complaints regarding
complaints       the composting operation.
Record of          (4) Each complaint and associated measures taken by the corporation
complaints       shall be recorded in a log book including
                      (a) a description of the complaint and the date and time it was
                      received by the corporation;
                      (b) wind direction, wind speed, temperature, humidity and other
                      atmospheric conditions at the time of the occurrence which resulted
                      in a complaint; and
                      (c) a description of the measures taken to address the cause of the
                      complaint. (EC691/00)
Compost          57. (1) All compost
classification       (a) shall be classified in accordance with the criteria identified in
                     the CCME Guidelines; and
                     (b) shall meet all criteria as established for trace elements set out in
                     Schedule B of these regulations.
Testing            (2) Testing of the compost quality shall be completed for every 1,000
                 tonnes of compost produced or every three months, whichever occurs



                                                      24
Updated 2009             Environmental Protection Act             Cap. E-9                     25
                    Waste Resource Management Regulations


earlier, and conducted in accordance with the minimum testing
procedures identified in section 4 of the CCME Guidelines.
                                                                             Classification
  (3) Compost which meets the criteria established in the CCME
Guidelines as Category B shall be classified in accordance with metal
concentrations, product maturity, amount of foreign matter, organic
matter content, pH and salinity.
  (4) Compost which is tested and classified as a hazardous or special       Hazardous or
waste shall be handled and treated in accordance with the requirements       special waste

of the Act. (EC691/00; 529/01)
58. (1) Compost which meets the criteria established in the CCME             Category A
Guidelines as Category A may be used in accordance with the uses stated      compost

in the CCME Guidelines for Category A compost.
  (2) Use of compost which meets the criteria established in the CCME        Category B
Guidelines as Category B may be used in accordance with the uses stated      compost

in the CCME Guidelines for Category B. (EC691/00)
  (3) Revoked by EC529/01.                                                   Food crops


                       C & D DISPOSAL SITES
59. An approval is not required for a C & D disposal site for the disposal   Approval not
of soil, bricks, mortar, concrete, asphalt pavement, trees, stumps, root     required

balls, and rock, excluding rock containing a sulphide bearing material
where
     (a) the materials are placed in an excavation pit approved pursuant
     to the Environmental Protection Act Excavation Pits Regulations
     (EC753/90);
     (b) the quantity being disposed of is less than 30 cubic metres;
     (c) the disposal is conducted by a person not involved in the
     business of C & D debris disposal; and
     (d) the disposal is of a private, non-commercial nature. (EC691/00)
   60. An application for approval under section 9 of the Act for the        Application for
initial construction or operation a C & D disposal site shall be             approval

accompanied by a report prepared by a professional engineer engaged in
the practice of engineering in the province verifying that the proposed C
& D disposal site complies with the design requirements imposed by the
Minister in respect of the construction or operation of the C & D disposal
site. (EC691/00; 253/09)
60.1 The Minister may, prior to issuing a permit under clause 2(4)(b) to     Design
construct or operate a C & D disposal site, impose any one or more of        requirements or
                                                                             constraints
the following design requirements or constraints in respect of the


                                     25
26                    Cap. E-9                 Environmental Protection Act           Updated 2009
                                          Waste Resource Management Regulations


                      construction or operation of the C & D disposal site, including, but not
                      limited to, requirements concerning:
                           (a) the use or installation of liner systems;
                           (b) the use or installation of leachate control and collection systems;
                           (c) the use or installation of odor control and mitigation systems;
                           (d) the use or installation of dust control and mitigation systems;
                           (e) the use or installation of noise control and mitigation systems;
                           (f) cell location, cell width, cell length, cell height or cell volume;
                           (g) screening from view of a highway, public park, playground,
                           public bathing beach, school, church, hospital, cemetery, residential
                           premises or public hall. (EC253/09)
C & D disposal        61. (1) Every person who owns a C & D disposal site shall ensure that
sites                 the site is selected, designed, constructed and operated so that it protects
                      the environment during the life span of the C & D disposal site.
Diversion of debris     (2) A person who generates debris shall employ all reasonable and
                      practical means, including source reduction, reuse or recycling, in order
                      to divert C & D debris from being disposed of at a C & D disposal site.
                      (EC691/00)
C & D disposal site   62. (1) Every owner of a C & D disposal site shall ensure that the C & D
requirements          disposal site has,
                           (a) where the C & D disposal site was constructed before April 18,
                           2009,
                              (i) a minimum of 1 metre of soil with a hydraulic conductivity of
                              1 x 10-5 cm/sec or less between the lowest elevation of any of the
                              waste and the highest elevation of the groundwater or bedrock,
                              (ii) a coverage plan for the placement of cover on the waste,
                              (iii) a controlled site entry and exit infrastructure,
                              (iv) a drainage plan for surface water including control
                              infrastructure (sedimentation ponds),
                              (v) appropriately designed road surfaces,
                              (vi) signs that indicate
                                  (A) the name of the C & D disposal site,
                                  (B) the hours of operation of the C & D disposal site,
                                  (C) the names of persons to contact and their contact
                                  information in the event of an emergency, and
                                  (D) all materials acceptable for disposal at the C & D disposal
                                  site,
                              (vii) at least one groundwater monitoring well installed
                              hydraulically above the gradient of the site and at least three
                              groundwater monitoring wells installed hydraulically below the
                              gradient direction,




                                                           26
Updated 2009            Environmental Protection Act              Cap. E-9   27
                   Waste Resource Management Regulations


       (viii) weigh scales approved and functioning pursuant to Weights
       and Measures Canada Standards, for the purpose of weighing
       waste received at the C & D disposal site,
       (ix) a minimum separation distance of 30 m from the nearest
       active disposal area to
           (A) the nearest property boundary, or
           (B) the road allocation of any common or public highway,
       (x) a minimum separation distance of 30 m from the nearest
       active disposal area to any watercourse boundary,
       (xi) a minimum separation distance of 30 m from the nearest
       active disposal area to any wetland boundary, and
       (xii) a minimum separation distance of 150 m from the nearest
       active disposal area to the foundation of the nearest off-site
       structure used for commercial, industrial, residential or
       institutional purposes; and
    (b) where the C & D disposal site is constructed after April 18,
    2009,
       (i) a minimum of 1 metre of soil with a hydraulic conductivity of
       1 x 10-5 cm/sec or less between the lowest elevation of any of the
       waste and the highest elevation of the groundwater or bedrock,
       (ii) a coverage plan for the placement of cover on the waste,
       (iii) a controlled site entry and exit infrastructure,
       (iv) a drainage plan for surface water including control
       infrastructure (sedimentation ponds),
       (v) appropriately designed road surfaces,
       (vi) signs that indicate
           (A) the name of the C & D disposal site,
           (B) the hours of operation of the C & D disposal site,
           (C) the names of persons to contact and their contact
           information in the event of an emergency, and
           (D) all materials acceptable for disposal at the C & D disposal
           site,
       (vii) at least one groundwater monitoring well installed
       hydraulically above the gradient of the site and at least three
       groundwater monitoring wells installed hydraulically below the
       gradient direction,
       (viii) weigh scales approved and functioning pursuant to Weights
       and Measures Canada Standards, for the purpose of weighing
       waste received at the C & D disposal site,
       (ix) a minimum separation distance of 300 m from the nearest
       active disposal area to the nearest property boundary,
       (x) a minimum separation distance of 200 m from the nearest
       active disposal area to any watercourse boundary, and




                                    27
28                     Cap. E-9                   Environmental Protection Act       Updated 2009
                                             Waste Resource Management Regulations


                                  (xi) a minimum separation distance of 100 m from the nearest
                                  active disposal area to any wetland boundary.
Application, initial     (2) For greater certainty,
construction of C &        (a) the requirements set out in this subsection do not apply to the
D disposal site
                           issuance of subsequent permits pursuant to clause 2(4)(b) of these
                           regulations; and
                           (b) every owner of a C & D disposal site shall ensure that the C & D
                           disposal site has, where the C & D disposal site is initially
                           constructed after April 18, 2009, the following minimum separation
                           distances in respect of the initial construction of the C & D disposal
                           site:
                              (i) a minimum separation distance of 500 m from the nearest
                              active disposal area to the foundation of the nearest off-site
                              structure used for commercial, industrial, residential or
                              institutional purposes,
                              (ii) a minimum separation distance of 150 m from the nearest
                              active disposal area to the road allocation of any common or
                              public highway,
                              (iii) a minimum separation distance of 500 m from the nearest
                              active disposal area to any public school, hospital, church, public
                              park or playground. (EC691/00; 253/09)
Operational            63. (1) Every owner of a C & D disposal site shall ensure that the C &
requirements           D disposal site incorporates, as a minimum, the following operational
                       requirements:
                           (a) placement of cover material in accordance with the plan for
                           cover placement approved by the Minister;
                           (b) direct supervision during the hours that the C & D disposal site
                           is open and is accepting materials;
                           (c) inspection of all loads by the supervisor of the C & D disposal
                           site prior to unloading;
                           (d) acceptance of only C & D debris;
                           (e) no acceptance of industrial waste unless otherwise approved by
                           the Minister in the terms and conditions of the approval;
                           (f) no acceptance of remaining waste, compostables, or recyclables;
                           (g) no acceptance of liquid wastes;
                           (h) litter is controlled;
                           (i) stabilization of exposed areas to prevent erosion and
                           sedimentation;
                           (j) dust, odours and noise are controlled;
                           (k) detailed records are kept which include the generator name, the
                           carrier name and the quantity and types of the materials disposed of
                           or stored;



                                                              28
Updated 2009             Environmental Protection Act             Cap. E-9                    29
                    Waste Resource Management Regulations


    (l) records shall be maintained at the C & D disposal site for a
    minimum of two years and be available for inspection upon request;
  (2) The owner of the C & D disposal site shall conduct a groundwater       Monitoring
and surface water monitoring program at the site.                            program

                                                                             Groundwater
  (3) The owner of the C & D disposal site shall submit a written report
to the Minister on or before March 31 of each year for the immediately
preceding calendar year, identifying the quantities and types of material
disposed of at the owner’s C & D disposal site.
  (4) If additional recycling components are utilized at the C & D           Report of material
disposal site, the quantities of these materials shall also be reported.     disposed


 (5) The owner of the C & D disposal site shall annually report to the       Water monitoring
Minister the results of the groundwater and ground and surface water         program

monitoring program.
  (6) The Minister may require that privately owned, commercially            Security
operated C & D disposal sites post financial security. (EC691/00)
64. (1) Every owner of a C & D disposal site shall prepare an Operation      Operation and
and Maintenance Manual for each C & D disposal site owned.                   Maintenance
                                                                             Manual

  (2) The Operation and Maintenance Manual required by subsection            Requirements
(1) shall include the following:
     (a) record drawings and specifications of the C & D disposal site;
     (b) a complete description of the operational procedures;
     (c) monitoring well logs and surface water monitoring logs,
     including the location plans showing the monitoring points;
     (d) contingency plans to deal with any waste not acceptable for
     disposal;
     (e) contingency plans to deal with emergency issues including but
     not limited to fire, explosions and spills;
     (f) procedures for the maintenance of disposal records including the
     names of the generator and carrier of the materials; and
     (g) a copy of the approval, including all terms and conditions of the
     approval.
  (3) The Operation and Maintenance Manual shall be submitted to the         Approval
Minister for approval at least 30 days prior to commencement of
operation.




                                     29
30                Cap. E-9                 Environmental Protection Act          Updated 2009
                                      Waste Resource Management Regulations


                    (4) The Operation and Maintenance Manual shall be kept on site at all
Inspection
                  times and shall be available for inspection. (EC691/00)

                                           RECYCLING PLANTS
Prohibition       65. Revoked by EC691/09. (EC691/00; 691/09)
Requirements      66. Revoked by EC691/09. (EC691/00; 691/09)
Report            67. (1) Revoked by EC691/09.
Recyclables not
processed           (2) Revoked by EC691/09. (EC691/00; 691/09)

                                                  OFFENCE
Offence           68. Every person who operates a landfill, composting facility, or C & D
                  disposal site that is not in compliance with these regulations is guilty of
                  an offence. (EC691/00; 691/09)




                                                       30
Updated 2009                Environmental Protection Act                      Cap. E-9   31
                       Waste Resource Management Regulations


                   SCHEDULE A
    GROUNDWATER, LEACHATE, AND SURFACE WATER
            MONITORING PARAMETERS

                                   PARAMETER
Parameter      Column 1           Column 2   Column 3                 Column 4
 Group
               Comprehensive      Indicator List   Comprehensive      Indicator List
               List for           for              List               for
               Groundwater and    Groundwater      for Surface        Surface
               Leachate           and Leachate     Water              Water
Inorganics
               Alkalinity         Alkalinity       Alkalinity         Alkalinity
               Ammonia                             Ammonia            Ammonia
               Arsenic                             Arsenic
               Barium                              Barium
               Boron                               Boron
               Cadmium            Cadmium          Cadmium
               Calcium            Calcium
               Chloride           Chloride         Chloride           Chloride
               Chromium                            Chromium
               Conductivity       Conductivity     Conductivity       Conductivity
               Copper                              Copper
               Iron               Iron             Iron
               Lead               Lead             Lead
               Magnesium          Magnesium
               Manganese
               Mercury                             Mercury
               Nitrate            Nitrate          Nitrate            Nitrate
               Nitrite                             Nitrite            Nitrite
               Total Kjeldahl                      Total Kjeldahl     Total Kjeldahl
               Nitrogen                            Nitrogen           Nitrogen
               pH                 pH               pH                 pH
               Total Phosphorus                    Total Phosphorus   Total
                                                                      Phosphorus
               Potassium          Potassium
               Sodium             Sodium
               Suspended          Suspended        Suspended          Suspended
               Solids             Solids           Solids             Solids
               Total Suspended    Total            Total Suspended    Total Suspended
               Solids             Suspended        Solids             Solids
                                  Solids
              Sulphate            Sulphate         Sulphate           Sulphate
              Zinc                                 Zinc
Volatile Organics
              Benzene
              1,4
              Dichlorobenzene
              Dichloromethane                      Dichloromethane
              Toluene                              Toluene
              Vinyl Chloride



                                            31
32   Cap. E-9                    Environmental Protection Act           Updated 2009
                            Waste Resource Management Regulations


     Other Organics
                                                     Biochemical      Biochemical
                                                     Oxygen (BOD)     Oxygen (BOD)
                  Chemical            Chemical       Chemical         Chemical
                  Oxygen Demand       Oxygen         Oxygen Demand    Oxygen
                                      Demand                          Demand
                  Dissolved           Dissolved      Dissolved
                  Organic Carbon      Organic        Organic Carbon
                                      Carbon
                   Phenol                            Phenol           Phenol
     Field Parameters
                                                     Temperature      Temperature
                  pH                  pH             pH               pH
                  Conductivity        Conductivity   Conductivity     Conductivity
                                                     Dissolved        Dissolved
                                                     Oxygen           Oxygen
                                                     Flow             Flow

     (EC691/00)




                                             32
Updated 2009                Environmental Protection Act                    Cap. E-9   33
                       Waste Resource Management Regulations


                  SCHEDULE B
 CONCENTRATIONS OF TRACE ELEMENTS IN COMPOST*:

                                  CATEGORY A                     CATEGORY B

Trace Elements               Maximum Concentration         Maximum Concentration
                             within Product                within Product
                             (mg/kg dry weight)            (mg/kg dry weight)
Arsenic (As)                             13                            75

Cadmium (Cd)                              3                          20

Cobalt (Co)                              34                          150

Chromium (Cr)                            210                       1060**

Copper (Cu)                              100                        760**

Mercury (Hg)                             0.8                         5

Molybdenum (Mo)                           5                          20

Nickel (Ni)                              62                          180

Lead (Pb)                                150                         500

Selenium (Se)                             2                          14

Zinc (Zn)                                500                        1850


*See CCME Guideline for maximum cumulative additions to soil.
** See CCME Guideline for further description of these values.

(EC691/00)




                                          33
34   Cap. E-9                  Environmental Protection Act            Updated 2009
                          Waste Resource Management Regulations


                            SCHEDULE C
                QUALITY CONTROL / ASSURANCE PROGRAM

     1.0 PURPOSE

     1.1 Quality Control

     1. For the purpose of this specification, quality control shall be defined
     as a planned system of inspection and tests to directly monitor and
     control the quality of the work.

     2. The applicant shall submit a quality control, inspection and test
     program for all landfill components.

     3. The applicant shall employ a quality control inspector (Inspector) who
     may be the same person as the installation supervisor.

     1.2 Quality Assurance

     1. For the purpose of this specification, quality assurance is defined as a
     planned system of activities, carried out by the applicant or his
     representative, that provides assurance that the landfill components were
     manufactured and installed as specified.

     2. The quality assurance program shall include tests similar to those
     carried out for quality control.

     2.0 GEOMEMBRANE

     2.1 General

     Geomembrane shall be tested for both manufacture and installation. Both
     destructive and non-destructive tests shall be used.

     2.2 Geomembrane Testing

     1. A minimum of one complete set of quality control tests on
     geomembrane rolls shall be performed at the frequencies given in Table
     1 to verify that all other specified parameters are in compliance with the
     material specifications.

     2. Test samples which fail to meet strength and environmental
     specifications shall result in rejection of applicable rolls. Further testing




                                           34
Updated 2009              Environmental Protection Act                Cap. E-9   35
                     Waste Resource Management Regulations


on geomembrane manufactured from the same resin batch shall be
conducted to determine acceptability.

3. A quality assurance consultant shall confirm that required quality
control has been done and shall certify the quality of the geomembrane,
prior to delivering. A quality control certificate is required for each batch
of resin and each production shift. The certificate shall include:

         Product Identification
         Roll Numbers
         Sampling Procedures
         Test Methods
         Test Results (including Environmental Stress Cracking or
         single-point Notched and Constant Tensile Load Time to
         Failure test data)
         Signature of Responsible Party
         The consultant may also request that all production line records
         be submitted for review.

4. The consultant shall have authority to visit the manufacturing facility
at any time to witness production and quality control testing, examine
production records and take independent samples.

2.3 Non-Destructive Testing

1. Test Seams (Start-up) - Test seams shall be made to verify that
adequate conditions exist for field seaming to proceed. Each seaming
apparatus shall produce a test seam at the beginning of each shift. In
addition, if a seaming operation has been suspended for more than four
hours, or after every 5 hours or if a breakdown of the seaming equipment
occurs, a test seam shall be produced prior to resumption of seaming
operations.

Test seams shall be made in the field on pieces of the approved
geomembrane. Each test seam shall be at least 1.5 m long x 300 mm
wide for extrusion and 3 m long by 300 mm wide for fusion, with
sufficient overlap for peel testing in the field tensiometer.

Two samples 25 mm wide shall be taken from each end of the test seam
using an approved template. The samples shall be tested in the field
tensiometer, one from each and in peel and shear respectively. Samples
tested in peel shall not fail in the seam. All test samples shall exhibit film
tear bond and strength as defined under seam properties, Table 1.




                                      35
36   Cap. E-9                    Environmental Protection Act             Updated 2009
                            Waste Resource Management Regulations


                                       TABLE 1
                                    GEOMEMBRANE

                     Material Property                    Minimum Average Roll Values
                                                                    (Metric)
                     Nominal Thickness                                1.5 mm(60 mils)
                                                            Units            Value
     Thickness, ASTM D751, NDF Mod., Nominal                 mm               200
     Indent Lowest Individual Reading                        mm               137
     Density, ASTM D1505                                    g/cm3            0.940
     Melt Flow Index, ASTM D1238 Cond, E. Max.            g/10 min.           1.0
     Carbon Black Content, ASTM D1603                      percent         2.0 - 3.0
     Carbon Black Dispersion, STM D3015                     rating            A2
     Minimum Tensile Properties, STM D638 Stress at
     Yield                                                 N/cm             231
     Stress at Break                                       N/cm             399
     Stress at Yield
     nominal gage of 1.30” per NSF Mod.                   percent           13
     Stress at Break
     nominal gage of 2.5” per NSF Mod.                    percent           560
     Tear Resistance, ASTM D1004                           N/cm            1230
                                                            N              200
     Puncture Resistance, FTMS 101, 2065                   N/cm            2280
                                                            N              347
     ESCR, ASTM D1693, NSF Mod., Pass                      hours           1500
     Dimensional Stability, ASTM D1204,
     NSF Mod., Max.                                       percent           2.0
     Low Temperature Brittleness                             C              -60
     Single-Point Notched Constant Tensile Load Time to
     Failure                                                (hr)            200
     Field Seam Properties
     1. Shear Strength                                     N/cm            212
     2. Peel Strength                                      N/cm         FTB and 139

     1. Film Tear Bond (FTB) is defined as failure of one of the sheets by
     tearing, instead of separating from the welded seam - that test specimen
     shall not fail by more than 10% into the seam. For double hot wedge
     fusion welded seam, both inside and outside tracks shall be tested.

     If the seam fails to pass, the seaming apparatus shall not be used for field
     seaming until any deficiencies have been corrected. This shall be verified
     by the production and successful testing of two consecutive test seams.

     2. Vacuum Testing - All extrusion welded seams and “T” seams shall be
     evaluated using vacuum box testing.

     A sudsy soap solution shall be applied to the test section and the vacuum
     box placed over the section. The vacuum box shall maintain at least .2
     bar vacuum during the test. Once a tight seal has been established, the


                                               36
Updated 2009             Environmental Protection Act               Cap. E-9   37
                    Waste Resource Management Regulations


test section shall be viably examined for a period of not less than 10
seconds to determine whether bubbling of the soapy solution at the seam
is occurring. The vacuum box is then moved and the process is repeated
on the next adjacent section. A minimum of 100 mm overlap shall be
provided between all test sections.

All locations where bubbling of the sudsy solution is observed shall be
clearly marked for repairs with a high visibility marker and recorded by
number on field test reports. Any failed portion of seam shall be repaired
and retested.

3. Air Pressure Testing - Double wedge welded seams shall be sealed off
at both ends. If the end of a seam will be an integral part of the
geomembrane, the sealing shall be done in such a way that it does not
harm the function of the geomembrane. The pressure feed device shall be
inserted into the air channel at one end of the seam and pressurized to 1.5
- 2.0 bars. The feed valve shall be closed and the pressure sustained for a
period of not less than 3 minutes. The pressure shall then be released by
slitting the air channel at the opposite end of the seam. The inspector
shall observe the drop in pressure on the manometer to verify the
continuity of the air channel.

If a pressure loss of greater than .2 bar is observed or if the required
pressure cannot be reached, then the seam shall be rejected, and shall be
either reconstructed in its entirety or the leak located and patched. The
entire seam shall then be retested according to the procedure outlined
above.

4. All seams shall be non-destructively tested by the installer over their
full length to verify the integrity of the seam. Non-destructive testing
shall be performed concurrently with field seaming. All non-destructive
testing shall be observed and documented by the inspector.

5. Seams failing a test shall be repaired and retested.

6. Where there are cap seams which cannot be subjected to a non-
destructive test using geomembrane of the same batch under the
supervision of the inspector, test the cap seams. Alternatively, remove
the seam and adjacent geomembrane panel, replace and test.

2.4 Destructive Testing

1. Destructive testing of field seams shall be performed at selected
locations in order to verify seaming properties. All sampling and testing



                                     37
38   Cap. E-9                 Environmental Protection Act           Updated 2009
                         Waste Resource Management Regulations


     shall be done concurrently with field seaming so that verification of field
     seam properties is made as the work progresses and corrective action
     implemented, if necessary.

     2. Test samples shall be taken at an average frequency of one test
     location per 150 m of seam. Sample locations shall be determined by the
     inspector taking into consideration the difficulty of subsequent repair and
     testing.

     3. Samples shall be cut under the direction of the inspector. Each sample
     shall be indelibly numbered and identified. Each sample shall be
     identified with the sample number, seam number, panel number, date,
     name of welding technician, and welding equipment number.

     4. The inspector may increase the amount of destructive testing based on
     the results of previous testing. Additional samples may also be required
     when the inspector has reason to suspect the presence of excess
     crystallinity, contamination, faulty seaming equipment or any reason
     affecting seam quality.

     5. The test sample shall measure approximately 300 mm wide by 1.0
     metre long with seam centred lengthwise along the sample.

     6. Twenty-five (25) mm wide sample strips shall be cut from the sample
     using an approved die, and tested by an on-site tensiometer. Two 25 mm
     wide samples shall be taken from each end for shear and peel testing.
     The seam shall not fail either test as specified in Section 2.3.

     7. The remaining sample shall be tested in an independent tensiometer to
     qualify seam strength properties and Film Tear Bond (FTB) according to
     the procedures outlined in this section.

     The inspector shall cut ten (10) 25 mm wide replicate specimens from
     the sample and shall test 5 specimens for seam shear strength and 5 for
     peel strength. To be acceptable, 5 out of the 5 replicate specimens must
     pass for each mode of testing. All specimens must fail in Film Tear Bond
     (FTB); any specimen that fails through the weld, or by adhesion at the
     weld-sheet interface, is a non-film Tear Bond break and shall be
     considered a failure.

     8. The test method and procedures to be used by the inspector shall
     employ a grip separation rate of 50 mm/min for peel and shear.




                                          38
Updated 2009             Environmental Protection Act               Cap. E-9   39
                    Waste Resource Management Regulations


9. The area from which the destructive test sample was taken shall be
repaired without delay and shall be non-destructively tested by vacuum
box as described in Section 2.3.2.

2.5 Inspection and Acceptance

1. As the work progresses, the inspector shall document all locations
requiring repair work and shall verify and document that all repairs have
been successfully made. No work on the liner shall be allowed if the
inspector is not present. This includes start-up tests, general seaming and
patching, and any work on penetrations or structures.

2. Seams are only considered to be accepted after they have passed the
specified non-destructive and destructive tests, and the equipment used
to produce the seams has passed the required start-up tests. If a seam fails
the above criteria, the seam must be reconstructed.

3. A double hot wedge fusion seam shall be considered acceptable only
when both outside and inside track welds are destructively tested and
meet the specification criteria.

4. If a seam fails the destructive test, the seam may be reconstructed
between the point of failure and any previously accepted test.

5. In lieu of #4 above, the installer may trace the extent of unacceptable
seam. Take 25 mm samples at minimum 3 metre distance on each side of
failed section. Test in both shear and peel. If one or both tests fail,
continue along seam at minimum 3 metre increments. Continue until
tests indicate pass results. Then take large samples for field laboratory
tensimeter testing. If field laboratory tests pass, make repairs - if they
fail, continue.

6. Reconstruction or repair of failed seam lengths shall be either by
capping of the failed seam (extrusion or fusion weld) or, in the case of a
double fusion weld, by extrusion fillet welding the overlap to the bottom
sheet. Cutting off the overlap and topping the failed fusion weld with
extrudate will not be permitted.

7. If the overlap of the outside (i.e. visible) weld is less than 30 mm,
extrusion welding of the overlap to the bottom sheet in the failed section
will not be permitted.




                                     39
40   Cap. E-9                 Environmental Protection Act           Updated 2009
                         Waste Resource Management Regulations


     8. Continuity of all reconstructed seams shall be subject to non-
     destructive testing. If reconstructed length exceeds 50 m, sample shall be
     taken for laboratory destructive testing.

     9. The entire geomembrane surface shall be examined by the inspector to
     confirm that it is free of any defects, blisters, undispersed raw materials,
     or contamination by foreign matter. The geomembrane surface shall be
     cleaned, if required, so that it is free of dust, mud, debris or any other
     material which may inhibit a thorough examination of the surface. Any
     suspect areas shall be clearly marked by the inspector and non-
     destructively tested according to the appropriate specified testing
     procedure.

     10. Overburden shall not be applied to any portion of the liner system
     until that portion system is inspected and has been approved.

     11. Gouges or scratches associated with grinding or from other sources
     whose depths are in excess of 10% of the geomembrane thickness shall
     be classified as defects and will require appropriate repairs in accordance
     with these specifications.

     12. Small tears, wrinkles or pinholes shall be repaired by seaming or
     patching. Other areas shall be patched or capped.

     13. Patches shall be round or oval, of the same material and thickness,
     and shall extend a minimum of 150 mm beyond the damaged or faulty
     area in all directions.

     14. Geomembrane surfaces to be patched, shall be abraded, in
     accordance with these Specifications. Surfaces must be clean and dry.

     15. Use approved extrusion welding equipment.

     16. All repairs shall be non-destructively tested.

     17. Cut and repair any large wrinkles or “fishmouths” identified by the
     inspector.

     3.0 COMPACTED CLAY LINER

     3.1 Compacted Clay Liner Quality Control

     Quality control of low permeability fill material and placement shall be
     based on the following minimum procedures and criteria:



                                          40
Updated 2009              Environmental Protection Act                Cap. E-9   41
                     Waste Resource Management Regulations



1. Prior to constructing the compacted clay liner, a test section shall be
constructed in two lifts to the specified thickness, consisting of not less
than three panels 3 m wide and 10 m long.

2. Mixing methods shall be modified as necessary to achieve specified
coefficient of permeability.

3. Placement and compaction methods shall be modified as necessary to
achieve specified coefficient of permeability.

4. Samples and measurements of test section shall be taken. Physical
parameters to be tested in the laboratory include grain size, moisture
content, Atterberg Limits, moisture density relationship and hydraulic
conductivity. Compacted in-situ density (by Nuclear Method ASTM
D2922) and permeability by air entry infiltrometer shall be measured.

5. The method of construction, verified by the applicant, shall then be
submitted to the Department of Fisheries, Aquaculture and Environment.
Once submitted, no deviation from the method of construction will be
allowed by the contractor unless written approval is obtained from the
Minister.

6. The installer shall employ a certified geotechnical company with
laboratory testing capabilities that can supply the qualified personnel and
equipment necessary to perform the required tests.

7. The geotechnical company shall perform all required tests on the
compacted clay liner material at the mixing/stockpile area. The results of
these tests shall be approved prior to the material being used for liner
construction.

8. The geotechnical company shall perform all tests on the compacted
clay liner subgrade. The results of these tests shall be available for
inspection as required.

9. The geotechnical company shall perform all required tests on the
compacted clay liner material while it is being placed, and after it is
complete, as defined in this specification. The results of these tests shall
be submitted for approval immediately upon completion of the Test.

10. The geotechnical company shall certify that all specified
requirements are met.




                                      41
42   Cap. E-9                  Environmental Protection Act           Updated 2009
                          Waste Resource Management Regulations


     3.2 Compacted Clay Liner Quality Assurance

     1. Quality Assurance of compacted clay liner material and placement
     shall be based on the following minimum procedures and criteria:

           1. An independent inspector shall perform all required tests on the
           compacted clay liner material at the stockpile area. The results of
           these tests shall be submitted for approval prior to the material
           being used for liner construction.

           2. The inspector shall perform all required tests on the compacted
           clay liner material while it is being placed, and after it is complete.
           The results of these tests shall be submitted for approval
           immediately upon completion of the tests.

           3. The average results of any ten consecutive density tests shall be
           equal to or greater than the specified density.

           4. Results of not more than two in any ten consecutive density tests
           may be less than the specified density.

           5. Results of any ten consecutive moisture content tests shall be
           within the specified moisture content limits.

           6. Results of not more than two in any ten consecutive moisture
           content tests may lie outside the specified content limits.

           7. Permeability evaluated from results of tests shall be equal to or
           less than the specified permeability.

           8. Average of results of any ten consecutive grain size tests shall be
           within the specified limits for grain size.

           9. The testing shall include the items identified in Table 2 as a
           minimum:




                                           42
Updated 2009                   Environmental Protection Act                          Cap. E-9   43
                          Waste Resource Management Regulations


                           TABLE 2
                 COMPACTED CLAY LINER TESTING
ITEM                            TESTING                       MINIMUM FREQUENCY
Clay Prior to Placement         Moisture Content              750 m3
                                Moisture-density curve        1 test/4000 m3
                                Grain Size                    1 test/750 m3
                                Atterberg Limits (liquid      1 test/4000 m3
                                limit and plasticity index)
                                Lab permeability (remolded    1 test/7500 m3
                                samples)
In Place Liner                  Density                       Every 200 m2 of exposed
                                                              lift surfaces
                                Moisture Content              100 m3
                                Atterberg Limits (liquid      2 tests/hectare/lift
                                limit and plasticity index)
                                Grain size (to the 2-micron   2 tests/hectare/lift
                                particle size)
                                Moisture-density curve        1,500 m3 or a minimum of 1
                                                              every 3 days placement
                                Laboratory permeability of    2 tests/hectare/lift -
                                undisturbed soil sample       undisturbed Shelby sample
                                In-situ permeability          5 tests/hectare/lift -
                                                              undisturbed Shelby sample

      10. Any portions of the completed liner which do not achieve
      compacted dry density and moisture contents in the range specified
      shall be replaced.

2. Method of testing of the compacted clay liner shall be as follows:

      1. The maximum density of low permeability fill and the optimum
      water content for compaction will be determined in accordance
      with ASTM D698, Method D.

      2. Bulk density will be determined in the field in accordance with
      ASTM D2922 or with ASTM D1556, whichever is most suitable,
      to obtain a representative density of the fill tested.

      3. Particle size analysis of the soil will be performed in accordance
      with ASTM D422.

      4. Samples for hydraulic conductivity testing of the compacted soil
      shall be collected in thin walled Shelby tubes from the compacted
      liner and tested in the laboratory. Confining pressure during the
      permeability testing will be equal to the applicable surcharge load.
      (EC691/00)



                                             43
44   Cap. E-9              Environmental Protection Act       Updated 2009
                      Waste Resource Management Regulations


                               SCHEDULE D

                               Manifest Form




     (EC576/04; 572/05)



                                       44
