                         PLEASE NOTE
This document, prepared by the Legislative Counsel Office, is an office
consolidation of this Act, current to March 13, 2010. It is intended for
information and reference purposes only.

This document is not the official version of the Act. The Act and the
amendments as printed under the authority of the Queen’s Printer for the
province should be consulted to determine the authoritative statement of the
law.

For more information concerning the history of this Act, please see the
Table of Public Acts.

If you find any errors or omissions in this consolidation, please contact:

                         Legislative Counsel Office
                            Tel: (902) 368-4291
                        Email: legislation@gov.pe.ca
                         CHAPTER E-6.1

                 EMERGENCY MEASURES ACT


                         INTERPRETATION
1. In this Act                                                               Definitions

    (a) “Director” means the Director of the Emergency Measures              Director
    Organization;
    (b) “disaster” means any real or anticipated occurrence such as          disaster
    disease, pestilence, fire, flood, tempest, explosions, enemy attack or
    sabotage, which endangers property, the environment or the health,
    safety or welfare of the civil population;
    (c) “emergency” means a present or imminent event in respect of          emergency
    which the Minister or municipality believes prompt co-ordination of
    action or special regulation of persons or property must be
    undertaken to protect the health, safety or welfare of people or to
    limit damage to property;
    (d) “Emergency Measures Organization” means the Prince Edward            Emergency
    Island Emergency Measures Organization established under section         Measures
                                                                             Organization
    3;
    (e) “emergency measures plan” means any plan, program or                 emergency
    procedure prepared by the province or a municipality that is             measures plan

    intended to mitigate the effects of an emergency or disaster and to
    provide for the safety, health or welfare of the civil population and
    the protection of property and the environment in the event of such
    an occurrence;
    (f) “Fire Marshal” means the fire marshal appointed pursuant to the      Fire Marshal
    Fire Prevention Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap. F-11;
    (g) “local authority” means                                              local authority
       (i) the council of a municipality,
       (ii) the Park Superintendent of a National Park or his delegate
       where an agreement is entered into with the Government of
       Canada in which it is agreed that the Park Superintendent is a
       local authority for the purposes of this Act,
       (iii) the Band Council of an Indian Band where an agreement is
       entered into with the Government of Canada in which it is agreed
       that the Band Council is a local authority for the purposes of this
       Act,



                                    1
2                     Cap. E-6.1                 Emergency Measures Act



                              (iv) in the case of special areas or districts, the Minister
                              responsible for emergency measures;
Minister
                           (h) “Minister” means the member of the Executive Council charged
                           by the Lieutenant Governor in Council with the administration of
                           this Act;
municipality               (i) “municipality” means an area as defined by the Municipalities
                           Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap. M-13 and includes the Cities of
                           Charlottetown and Summerside, and the Towns of Cornwall and
                           Stratford;
state of emergency         (j) “state of emergency” means a state of emergency declared by the
                           Minister pursuant to subsection 9(1);
state of local             (k) “state of local emergency” means a state of local emergency
emergency                  declared by a local authority pursuant to subsection 9(2) or by the
                           mayor or chair of a municipality pursuant to subsection 9(2.1);
Workers                    (l) “Workers’ Compensation Board” means the Workers’
Compensation               Compensation Board of Prince Edward Island established pursuant
Board
                           to the Workers’ Compensation Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap. W-7. 1990,
                           c.11, s.1; 1999,c.2,s.1.

                                                ADMINISTRATION
Administration        2. (1) The Minister is responsible for the administration of this Act.
Responsibilities of     (2) The Minister shall co-ordinate emergency measures plans within
Minister              the province and may delegate powers invested in him by or under this
                      Act. 1990, c.11, s.2.
Establishment         3. (1) The Prince Edward Island Emergency Measures Organization is
                      hereby established.
Director                (2) The Lieutenant Governor in Council may appoint a person to be
                      known as the Director of the Emergency Measures Organization who
                      shall, under the direction of the Minister, be responsible for the
                      administration of the Emergency Measures Organization.
Emergency               (3) The Emergency Measures Organization has and shall exercise and
Measures              perform such powers and duties as are vested in it by or under this Act
Organization,
powers                and those assigned to it by the Minister. 1990, c.11, s.3.
Committees            4. The Minister may appoint such committees as he considers necessary
                      or desirable to advise and assist him in the administration of this Act.
                      1990, c.11, s.4.




                                                           2
                          Emergency Measures Act                Cap. E-6.1                      3



                         EMERGENCY PLAN
5. Subject to the approval of the Lieutenant Governor in Council, the        Agreements
Minister may
    (a) enter into agreements with the Government of Canada or with a
    province or an agent of either of them in respect of emergency
    measures plans;
    (b) enter into agreements with the Government of Canada and the
    Workers’ Compensation Board for the administration and payment
    of compensation benefits to persons engaged in training or carrying
    out duties related to a state of emergency or a state of local
    emergency. 1990, c.11, s.5.
6. The Emergency Measures Organization may, subject to the approval          Emergency
of the Minister,                                                             Measures
                                                                             Organization,
     (a) produce a provincial emergency measures plan;                       powers
     (b) review and approve, or require modification to provincial and
     municipal emergency measures plans;
     (c) make surveys and studies to identify and record actual and
     potential hazards which may cause an emergency or disaster;
     (d) make surveys and studies of resources and facilities to provide
     information for the effective preparation of emergency measures
     plans;
     (e) conduct public information programs related to the prevention
     and mitigation of damage by disaster;
     (f) conduct training and training exercises for the effective
     implementation of emergency measures plans;
     (g) procure food, clothing, medicine, equipment and goods of any
     nature or kind for the purposes of mitigating emergencies and
     disasters; and
     (h) authorize or require the implementation of any emergency
     measures plan. 1990, c.11, s.6.
7. The Minister may                                                          Minister, powers
    (a) divide the province into areas for the purpose of this Act;
    (b) request municipalities to prepare emergency measures plans
    including mutual assistance programs, and to submit them to the
    Emergency Measures Organization for review for adequacy and
    integration with the provincial emergency plan;
    (c) establish procedures for the prompt and effective implementation
    of emergency measures plans;
    (d) request any person to develop emergency measures plans in
    conjunction with the Emergency Measure Organization or the
    municipalities to remedy or alleviate any hazard to persons, property
    or the environment that is or might be created



                                    3
4                       Cap. E-6.1                 Emergency Measures Act



                                (i) by a condition that exists or may exist on that person’s
                                property,
                                (ii) by that person’s use of property,
                                (iii) by an operation in which that person is or may be engaged,
                                (iv) by a process that that person is or may be utilizing; and
                             (e) issue directions with respect to any other matter or thing that the
                             Minister considers necessary for the administration of this Act.
                             1990, c.11, s.7.
Municipality,           8. Each municipality
powers                      (a) may establish and maintain a municipal emergency measures
                            organization by passage of a bylaw;
                            (b) may appoint a co-ordinator of the municipal emergency
                            organization, and prescribe duties that contain the preparation and
                            co-ordination of emergency measures plans for the municipality;
                            (c) may appoint a committee to advise it on the development of
                            emergency measures plans;
                            (d) pursuant to clause 7(b), may prepare and approve emergency
                            measures plans;
                            (e) may enter into agreements with and make payments to persons
                            and organizations for the provisions of services in the development
                            and implementation of emergency measures plans;
                            (f) may use employees, property or equipment of the municipality
                            within or outside the municipality. 1990, c.11, s.8.

                                               STATES OF EMERGENCY
Declaration, state of   9. (1) The Minister may at any time, when he is satisfied that an
emergency               emergency exists or may exist, declare a state of emergency in respect to
                        all or any area of the province.
Idem, local               (2) A local authority may, when satisfied that an emergency exists,
authority               declare a state of local emergency.
Council unable to         (2.1) Where the council of a municipality is unable to act promptly in
act promptly            declaring a state of local emergency in a municipality pursuant to
                        subsection (2), the mayor or chair of the municipality may, after
                        consulting a majority of the members of the council of the municipality
                        where practicable, declare a state of local emergency in the municipality.
Idem, nature of           (3) A declaration under this section shall identify the nature of the
                        emergency and the area in which it exists.
Effective date of        (4) A declaration of a state of emergency is effective on the date on
declaration             which it is issued. 1990, c.11, s.9; 1999,c.2,s.2.




                                                             4
                           Emergency Measures Act                   Cap. E-6.1                    5



10. When a state of emergency or a state of local emergency has been
                                                                                 Publication
declared pursuant to this Act, the Minister or the local authority, as the
case may be, shall immediately cause the details of the declaration to be
communicated or published by such means as it is considered the most
likely to make the contents of the declaration known to the population of
the area affected. 1990, c.11, s.10.
11. Upon a state of emergency being declared in respect to the province          Powers exercisable
or an area thereof, or upon a state of local emergency being declared in         when state of
                                                                                 emergency declared
respect to a municipality or an area thereof, the Minister may, during the
state of emergency, in respect of the province or an area thereof, or the
municipality may during the state of local emergency, in respect of such
municipality or an area thereof, as the case may be, do everything
necessary for the protection of property, the environment and the health
or safety of persons therein, including
     (a) cause an emergency measures plan to be implemented;
     (b) acquire or utilize or cause the acquisition or utilization of any
     personal property by confiscation or any means considered
     necessary;
     (c) authorize or require any qualified person to render assistance of
     such type as that person may be willing and qualified to perform;
     (d) control or prohibit travel to or from any area or on any road,
     street or highway;
     (e) provide for the maintenance and restoration of essential facilities,
     the distribution of essential supplies and the maintenance and co-
     ordination of emergency medical, social and other essential services;
     (f) cause the evacuation of persons and the removal of livestock and
     personal property threatened by a disaster or emergency, and make
     arrangements for the adequate care and protection thereof;
     (g) authorize any person properly identified as authorized by the
     Minister, by the Emergency Measures Organization, or by the
     municipal emergency measures organization, to enter into any
     building or upon any land without warrant;
     (h) prohibit persons from entering into or upon any building,
     structure, premises, land, place or area;
     (i) cause the demolition or removal of any building, structure, tree or
     crop where the demolition or removal is necessary or advisable for
     the purposes of reaching the scene of a disaster, in attempting to
     forestall its occurrence or combating its progress;
     (j) procure food, clothing, fuel, equipment, medical or other
     essential supplies and the use of property, services, resources or
     equipment; and
     (k) order the assistance, with or without remuneration of persons
     needed to carry out the provisions mentioned in this section,



                                     5
6                 Cap. E-6.1                  Emergency Measures Act



                  and in addition, the Minister may authorize or require a municipality to
                  cause an emergency measures plan for the municipality or any part
                  thereof to be implemented. 1990, c.11, s.11.
State of local
emergency         12. Upon declaring a state of local emergency, the local authority
                      (a) shall immediately forward a copy of the declaration to the
                      Minister; and
                      (b) may authorize any person or committee to exercise any power
                      vested in it under section 11. 1990, c.11, s.12.
Co-ordinators     13. During a state of emergency
                      (a) the Fire Marshal is the co-ordinator of all efforts in relation to the
                      suppression and prevention of fires;
                      (b) the officer commanding “L” Division of the Royal Canadian
                      Mounted Police is the co-ordinator of all efforts in relation to law
                      enforcement. 1990, c.11, s.13.
Termination by    14. (1) The Minister may
Minister               (a) terminate a state of emergency with respect to an area identified
                       by him in his declaration of a state of emergency when he believes
                       on reasonable grounds an emergency no longer exists in such area;
                       and
                       (b) terminate a state of local emergency with respect to an area
                       identified by a local authority in its declaration of a state of local
                       emergency when he believes on reasonable grounds an emergency
                       no longer exists in such area.
Termination by      (2) The local authority may terminate a state of local emergency with
local authority   respect to an area identified by it in its declaration of a state of local
                  emergency when it believes on reasonable grounds, an emergency no
                  longer exists in such area. 1990, c.11, s.14.
Termination       15. (1) A state of emergency ends
conditions             (a) when it is terminated by the Minister pursuant to clause 14(1)(a);
                       or
                       (b) subject to subsection (2), fourteen days after the day on which it
                       was declared.
Renewal             (2) A state of emergency may be renewed by the Minister with the
                  approval of the Lieutenant Governor in Council if it has not been
                  terminated pursuant to clause 14(1)(a). 1990,c.11,s.15.
Termination       16. (1) A state of local emergency ends
                       (a) when the area identified by the local authority in its declaration
                       of a state of local emergency is included in an area identified by the
                       Minister in his declaration of a state of emergency;



                                                        6
                           Emergency Measures Act                 Cap. E-6.1                    7



    (b) when it is terminated by the Minister pursuant to clause 14(1)(b)
    or by the local authority pursuant to subsection 14(2);
    (c) subject to subsection (2), seven days after the day on which it
    was declared.
                                                                               Renewal
  (2) A state of local emergency may be renewed by the local authority
with approval of the Minister if it has not ended pursuant to subsection
(1).
  (3) The provisions of this Act, respecting a state of local emergency, or    Idem
the declaration thereof, apply to a renewal of a state of local emergency.
1990, c.11, s.16.

                      LIABILITY FOR DAMAGE
17. (1) The Minister, the local authority, a committee established under       Liability
this Act or a member thereof, any duly organized Emergency Measures
Organization, or any other person
     (a) are not liable for any damage arising out of any action taken
     pursuant to this Act or the regulations;
     (b) are not subject to any proceedings by prohibition, or injunction
     with respect to any action taken pursuant to this Act or the
     regulations.
  (2) Every person who with proper authority is absent from his                Absenteeism
accustomed employment or duty authorized by the Minister or by the
local authority for the purpose of this Act shall, while so absent, for all
purposes relative to retention of employment, of seniority rights, of
superannuation benefits, be deemed to have been in his accustomed
employment during the period of absence.
  (3) The Lieutenant Governor in Council may order compensation for            Compensation
damage arising out of any action taken pursuant to this Act where he has
reason to believe a person, local authority or committee ma have been,
except for operation of subsection (1), liable therefor. 1990, c.11, s.17.

                            ENFORCEMENT
18. When implementing an emergency measures plan pursuant to this              Right of entry
Act or the regulations, any person properly identified as authorized by
the Minister, the Emergency Measures Organization or the municipal
emergency measures organization has the right at any time to enter upon
any property. 1990, c.11, s.18.
19. Every person who obstructs the Minister, the local authority, the          Offence and penalty
Emergency Measures Organization, a committee established pursuant to



                                     7
8             Cap. E-6.1                 Emergency Measures Act



              this Act or any person in the performance of any action, matter or thing
              authorized by this Act or who contravenes or fails to comply
                   (a) with any provision of this Act or any regulations under this Act;
                   or
                   (b) with any direction, order or requirement made pursuant to this
                   Act or the regulations
              commits an offence and is liable on summary conviction, in the case of
              an individual, to a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $2,000 or
              in the case of a corporation, of not less than $100 and not more than
              $10,000, or to imprisonment for a term not more than six months, or to
              both. 1990, c.11, s.19.

                                          REGULATIONS
Regulations   20. The Lieutenant Governor in Council may, on the recommendation of
              the Minister, make regulations respecting
                  (a) emergency planning for the continuity of functions of
                  departments, boards, commissions, corporations and other agencies
                  of the government of Prince Edward Island;
                  (b) the vesting of special powers and duties in various departments
                  and agencies of the government for the purposes of emergency
                  planning and the implementation of emergency measures plans;
                  (c) the organization, responsibilities, powers, duties and operation of
                  fire auxiliary forces throughout the province or any part thereof;
                  (d) authority to be delegated under this Act;
                  (e) cost incurred in emergency and disaster operations;
                  (f) the sharing of costs incurred by the province or by a municipality
                  in implementing emergency measures plans;
                  (g) the administration of an disbursement from a disaster relief fund;
                  (h) any matter or thing that the Lieutenant Governor in Council
                  considers necessary for the administration of this Act.
                  1990,c.11,s.20; 2006,c.16,s.63(3).
Repeal        21. Act repealed. 1990, c.11, s.21.




                                                    8
