                         PLEASE NOTE
This document, prepared by the Legislative Counsel Office, is an office
consolidation of this Act, current to December 26, 2009. It is intended for
information and reference purposes only.

This document is not the official version of the Act. The Act and the
amendments as printed under the authority of the Queen’s Printer for the
province should be consulted to determine the authoritative statement of the
law.

For more information concerning the history of this Act, please see the
Table of Public Acts.

If you find any errors or omissions in this consolidation, please contact:

                         Legislative Counsel Office
                            Tel: (902) 368-4291
                        Email: legislation@gov.pe.ca
                           CHAPTER E-9

                 ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION ACT


                          INTERPRETATION
1. In this Act                                                                  Definitions

    (a) repealed by 2008,c.13,s.1;                                              agricultural crop

    (a.1) repealed by 2008,c.13,s.1;                                            animal unit

    (a.2) repealed by 2001,c.34,s.1;                                            basal area

    (a.3) “beach” includes that portion of the shoreline land                   beach
    commencing at
       (i) the base of the bank or slope where the terrestrial land meets
       the shoreline, or
       (ii) the seaward extremity of a sand dune,
    as may be relevant in the circumstances and extending seaward a
    distance of three miles, and containing water, sand, gravel, rock,
    shale or other earthen material;
    (a.4) “broadcast” means to cast, spread, spray, or scatter seed,            broadcast
    pesticides, or other material over an area greater than 2 square
    metres per application;
    (a.5) repealed by 2002,c.5,s.1;                                             buffer zone

    (a.6) repealed by 2008,c.13,s.1;                                            cereal crop

    (a.7) repealed by 2008,c.13,s.1;                                            clear-cut

    (b) “contaminant” includes any solid, liquid, gas, waste, odour,            contaminant
    vibration, radiation, sound, or a combination of them
       (i) which is foreign to or in excess of the natural constituents of
       the environment into which it is being introduced,
       (ii) which will or may adversely affect, either directly or
       indirectly, the natural, physical, chemical, or biological quality of
       the environment,
       (iii) which is or may be injurious to the health or safety of a
       person or be damaging to property or to plant or animal life,
       (iv) which interferes with or is likely to interfere with the comfort,
       well-being, livelihood, or enjoyment of life of a person, or
       (v) which is declared by regulation to be a contaminant;




                                       1
2                     Cap. E-9                 Environmental Protection Act



contaminated site          (b.1) “contaminated site” means an area of the environment
                           designated as a contaminated site by the Minister under subsection
                           21.1(3);
contaminated sites         (b.2) “contaminated sites registry” means the contaminated sites
registry                   registry established under subsection 21.1(1);
Department                 (c) “Department” means the Department of Environment, Energy
                           and Forestry;
designated material        (c.1) “designated material” means a material or product that
                              (i) is prescribed as a designated material in the regulations, or
                              (ii) meets the criteria for a designated material as set out in the
                              regulations;
discharge                  (d) “discharge” includes any drainage, deposit, release, spill, leak or
                           emission;
Division                   (e) repealed by 1989(2nd),c.1,s.2;
environment                (f) “environment” includes
                              (i) air, land and water,
                              (ii) plant and animal, including human, life,
                           and any feature, part, component, resource or element thereof;
environment officer        (g) “environment officer” means a government employee so
                           designated or appointed by the Minister;
environmental              (h) “environmental health” means those aspects of human health that
health                     are or can be affected by contaminants or changes in the
                           environment;
excavation pit             (i) “excavation pit” means any excavation in the ground opened for
                           the purpose of searching for or removing clay, gravel, sand, shale,
                           subsoil, topsoil, rock or any other surface or subterranean deposit,
                           but does not include an excavation made within the boundaries of a
                           highway;
farm field                 (i.01) repealed by 2008,c.13,s.1;
forage crop                (i.1) repealed by 2002,c.5,s.1;
forested riparian          (i.2) repealed by 2008,c.13,s.1;
zone
frost seeding              (i.3) repealed by 2008,c.13,s.1;
headland                   (i.03) repealed by 2002,c.5,s.1;
heavy equipment            (i.4) repealed by 2008,c.13,s.1;
intensive livestock        (i.5) repealed by 2008,c.13,s.1;
operation
landlocked pond            (i.6) repealed by 2008,c.13,s.1;

                                                              2
                    Environmental Protection Act               Cap. E-9                         3



(j) “litter” as a verb, means to discard trash, garbage, rubbish or any
                                                                          litter
other objects, and, as a noun, means trash, garbage or other objects
so discarded;
                                                                          livestock
(j.1) “livestock” includes, but is not limited to, animals commonly
referred to as cows, cattle, swine, horses, sheep, goats and poultry;
(k) “Minister” means the Minister of Environment, Energy and              Minister
Forestry;
(l) “motor vehicle” means a vehicle that is powered, drawn,               motor vehicle
propelled or driven by any means other than muscular power;
(m) “municipality” has the same meaning as in the Municipalities          municipality
Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap. M-13 but includes the City of
Charlottetown and the City of Summerside;
(n) repealed by 1991,c.10,s.1;                                            person

(n.1) repealed by 2008,c.13,s.1;                                          perimeter coastline

(n.11) “recyclable material” means a material or product that             recyclable material
   (i) is prescribed as a recyclable material in the regulations, or
   (ii) meets the criteria for a recyclable material as set out in the
   regulations;
(n.12) “recycling” means the practice of accepting, collecting,           recycling
storing, sorting, handling, and preparing for transport or
transporting, recyclable material for the purpose of the use or
incorporation of the material in the manufacture of secondary
products, and includes
   (i) compacting,
   (ii) bundling,
   (iii) baling,
   (iv) shredding, and
   (v) crushing;
(n.13) “recycling facility” means a facility or place where recyclable    recycling facility
material is
   (i) accepted and stored, and
   (ii) handled, collected, sorted or prepared for transport,
   for the purpose of the use, reuse or incorporation of the material
   in the manufacture of secondary products;
(n.2) repealed by 2008,c.13,s.1;                                          row crop

(o) “sand dune” means a wind or wave-deposited formation of               sand dune
vegetated or drifting wind-blown sand that lies generally parallel to
and landward of the beach and between the upland limit of the beach
and the foot of the most inland dune slope;

                                 3
4                     Cap. E-9                 Environmental Protection Act



                           (o.1) repealed by 2008,c.13,s.1;
selection harvest
source of                  (o.2) “source of contaminant” means anything that discharges a
contaminant                contaminant into the environment;
under seeded cereal        (o.3) repealed by 2008,c.13,s.1;
crop
undertaking                (p) “undertaking” includes any construction, industry, operation or
                           other project or any alteration or modification of any existing
                           undertaking which will or may
                              (i) cause the emission or discharge of any contaminant into the
                              environment,
                              (ii) have an effect on any unique, rare or endangered feature of
                              the environment,
                              (iii) have a significant effect on the environment or necessitate
                              further development which is likely to have a significant effect on
                              the environment, or
                              (iv) cause public concern because of its real or perceived effect or
                              potential effect on the environment,
                           but excludes all undertakings mentioned in sections 10, 12 and 13;
waste                      (p.1) “waste” includes materials discarded by persons in the course
                           of their daily activities at home or at commercial businesses,
                           industries and institutions or other related activities;
waste management
                           (p.2) “waste management” means a system or process for the
                           collection, transportation, separation, treatment or disposal of waste
                           and includes disposal sites and landfill sites;
waste treatment            (q) “waste treatment system” means any plant or installation used, or
system                     intended to be used to treat a contaminant prior to disposal on land,
                           or into air or water and includes a sewerage system;
water                      (r) “water” includes liquid and frozen surface and ground water;
watercourse                (s) “watercourse” means an area which has a sediment bed and may
                           or may not contain water, and without limiting the generality of the
                           foregoing, includes the full length and width of the sediment bed,
                           bank and shore of any stream, spring, creek, brook, river, lake, pond,
                           bay, estuary or coastal body, any water therein, and any part thereof,
                           up to and including the watercourse boundary;
watercourse                (s.1) repealed by 2001,c.34,s.1;
boundary
water supply system        (t) “water supply system” means a water works for the collection,
                           treatment, purification, storage, supply or distribution of water to
                               (i) five or more households, or
                               (ii) a public building or place of assembly;
well                       (u) “well” means an artificial opening in the ground

                                                              4
                        Environmental Protection Act               Cap. E-9                      5



       (i) from which water is obtained, or
       (ii) made for the purpose of exploring for or obtaining water;
    (u.1) “well-head protection area” means the surface and sub-surface       well head protection
    area surrounding a well, supplying any water supply system, through       area

    which contaminants may or are reasonably likely to move toward
    and reach such well;
    (v) “wetland” means                                                       wetland
       (i) an area which contains hydric soil, aquatic or water-tolerant
       vegetation, and may or may not contain water, and includes any
       water therein and everything up to and including the wetland
       boundary, and
       (ii) without limiting the generality of the foregoing, includes any
       area identified in the Prince Edward Island Wetland Inventory as
       open water, deep marsh, shallow marsh, salt marsh, seasonally
       flooded flats, brackish marsh, a shrub swamp, a wooded swamp, a
       bog or a meadow;
    (w) repealed by 2008,c.13,s.1. 1988,c.19,s.1; 1989(2nd),c.1,s.2;          wetland boundary
    1991,c.10,s.1;    1992,c.21,s.1;     1993,c.29,s.4;    1997,c.20,s.3;
    1999,c.24,s.1;     2000,c.5,s.3;     2001,c.34,s.1;      2002,c.5,s.1;
    2004,c.36,s.3; 2004,c.30,s.1; 2008,c.13,s.1; 2009,c.69,s.1.

                               PURPOSE
2. The purpose of this Act is to manage, protect and enhance the              Purpose
environment. 1988,c.19,s.2.

                          ADMINISTRATION
3. (1) The Minister may take such action as he considers necessary in         Powers of Minister
order to manage, protect or enhance the environment including
     (a) investigating and inquiring into any activity or situation that
     causes, appears to be the cause of, or may cause, contamination of
     the environment;
     (b) coordinating the work and efforts of public departments, boards,
     commissions, agencies and interest groups in the province respecting
     management of the environment;
     (c) preparing and publishing policies, strategies, objectives and
     standards;
     (d) planning, designing, constructing, operating and maintaining
     works and undertakings;
     (e) exercising exclusive control over




                                     5
6                   Cap. E-9                  Environmental Protection Act



                            (i) the quality, use, protection or alteration of all surface, ground
                            and shore waters and all beaches, sand dunes, and wetlands
                            within the jurisdiction of the province,
                            (ii) the allocation of the use of water,
                            (iii) preservation of the environment within the jurisdiction of the
                            province;
                         (f) entering into agreements;
                         (g) delegating any of his functions under this Act or the regulations;
                         (h) performing such other functions as may be assigned to him by
                         the Lieutenant Governor in Council.
Environmental         (2) For the purpose of increasing environmental awareness in the
awareness program   province, the Minister may support and encourage the development of
                    educational programs respecting environmental management.
                    1988,c.19,s.3; 1992,c.21,s.2.
Council             4. (1) The Lieutenant Governor             in   Council   may   appoint   an
                    Environmental Advisory Council.
Functions             (2) The Council shall
                        (a) serve as an advisory board to the Minister;
                        (b) perform such functions as may be prescribed by regulations.
Composition            (3) The Council shall consist of not less than ten and not more than
                    fifteen members appearing to the Minister to be representative of the
                    public, including representation of the interests of agriculture, tourism,
                    fisheries and industry and one member nominated by the Federation of
                    Prince Edward Island Municipalities.
Powers of Cabinet     (4) The Lieutenant Governor in Council
                        (a) shall designate a chairman and vice-chairman of the Council
                        from the membership thereof;
                        (b) may authorize payment of a daily allowance and expenses to
                        members of the Council;
                        (c) may appoint local advisory boards for specified areas, or
                        designate an existing board, commission, or other body as a local
                        advisory board.
Term of office        (5) Members of the Council shall be appointed for such term as the
                    Lieutenant Governor in Council may determine in the case of each
                    member and, subject to subsection (6), are eligible for reappointment.
Reappointment         (6) A person who has served two consecutive terms as a member of the
                    Council is not, during the twelve months following the completion of his
                    second term, eligible for reappointment to the Council.



                                                           6
                         Environmental Protection Act            Cap. E-9                         7



  (7) Where a member dies, retires or is removed from office, the
                                                                            Vacancies
Lieutenant Governor in Council may appoint a person to serve the
unexpired term of that member.
  (8) The Council shall submit annual reports to the Minister on matters    Annual reports
dealt with by the Council including
    (a) submissions received by the Council;
    (b) investigations conducted by the Council;
    (c) reports made by the Council;
    (d) recommendations of the Council.
  (9) Upon receiving an annual report from the Council, the Minister        Tabling report
shall lay the report before the next ensuing session of the Legislature.
  (10) The Council may, with the approval of the Minister, engage the       Specialist services
services of persons having special technical or other knowledge in
connection with any public hearing, investigation or study under this
Act. 1988,c.19,s.4; 1992,c.21,s.3.
5. Repealed by 2008,c.13,s.2. 1988, c.19, s.5; 2008,c.13,s.2.               Environmental
                                                                            Coordinating
                                                                            Committee

6. (1) Repealed by 1989(2nd),c.1,s.2.                                       Environmental
                                                                            Management
                                                                            Division

  (2) Repealed by 1991,c.10,s.2.                                            Functions
                                                                            Environment
 (3) The Minister may designate persons, by notice published in the         officers
Gazette, as environment officers.
  (4) The function of an environment officer is to enforce such             Function
requirements of this Act and the regulations as the Minister may
authorize.
  (5) The following persons are environment officers by virtue of their     Environment
office:                                                                     officers

     (a) any officer or member of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police;
     (b) a conservation officer appointed under the Wildlife Conservation
     Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap. W-4.1;
     (c) a fisheries officer appointed under the Fisheries Act (Canada)
     R.S.C. 1985, c. F-14.
  (6) A copy of an identification card purporting to be signed by the       Identification
Minister is prima facie proof that the individual named therein is an
environment officer. 1988,c.19,s.6; 1989(2nd),c.1,s.2; 1991,c.10,s.2;
2008,c.13,s.3.


                                      7
8                   Cap. E-9                 Environmental Protection Act



                    7. (1) This section applies to natural persons.
Application
Orders                (2) Where the Minister or an environment officer believes, on
                    reasonable and probable grounds,
                        (a) that a contaminant has been, is being, or is going to be,
                        discharged into the environment, or, otherwise, that an act or
                        omission of a natural person is or may be a contravention of this Act
                        or the regulations or otherwise be a threat to the environment or
                        environmental health; and
                        (b) that it is necessary or advisable for the protection of the
                        environment or the prevention or control of danger to human life or
                        health or of damage to property,
                    the Minister or the environment officer, as the case may be, may issue an
                    environmental protection order to
                        (c) the natural person who is the owner or previous owner of the
                        contaminant or the source of the contaminant;
                        (d) the natural person who is or was in occupation of the
                        contaminant or the source of the contaminant;
                        (e) the natural person who has, or had, the charge, management, or
                        control of the contaminant or the source of the contaminant;
                        (f) the natural person whose act or omission is or may be a
                        contravention of this Act or the regulations or otherwise be a threat
                        to the environment or environmental health; or
                        (g) one or more of the above persons.
Terms, conditions
and requirements       (3) An environmental protection order issued pursuant to subsection
                    (2) may specify terms and conditions, including time limits, and may
                    require the natural person to whom it is directed, at his own cost, if any,
                    to
                         (a) meet with a representative of the Department and other persons
                         for such purposes as may be required by the environmental
                         protection order;
                         (a.1) permit inspection;
                         (b) permit testing and sampling;
                         (c) carry out inspections, testing, and sampling, including
                         professional hydro-geological or engineering investigations, to
                         determine the extent and effects of the contaminant;
                         (d) cease an activity specified in the environmental protection order
                         either permanently or for a period of time, as specified in the
                         environmental protection order;
                         (e) clean, repair, and restore the area affected by the contaminant to
                         the extent indicated in the environmental protection order or,
                         otherwise, to the satisfaction of the Minister;
                         (f) take specified action to prevent or avoid danger to human life or
                         health or damage to property or to protect the environment;

                                                          8
                         Environmental Protection Act               Cap. E-9                        9



    (g) submit a written report with respect to his activities pursuant to
    clauses (c), (e) and (f);
    (h) do any or all of those things specified in clauses (a) to (g) either
    forthwith or as of the future date specified in the environmental
    protection order.
  (4) For the purpose of investigating threats to the environment or           Powers of
environmental health or otherwise ensuring compliance with this Act or         environment
                                                                               officers
the regulations, an environment officer, or a peace officer may
     (a) subject to subsections (5), (6) and (7), at any reasonable time,
     enter and inspect any place in which he believes on reasonable
     grounds there is a contaminant or any other thing in respect of which
     this Act or the regulations apply;
     (b) examine any contaminant or suspected contaminant, or any other
     thing in respect of which this Act or the regulations apply and take
     samples of it;
     (c) require any natural person to produce for inspection or copying,
     in whole or in part, any record or other document that the
     environment officer or peace officer believes on reasonable grounds
     contains any information relevant to the administration of this Act or
     the regulations; and
     (d) conduct any tests or analyses or take any measurements.
  (5) An environment officer or a peace officer may not enter a                Entry to dwelling-
dwelling-place except with the consent of the occupant of the dwelling-        place

place or under the authority of a warrant.
                                                                               Authority to issue
  (6) Where on ex parte application a justice is satisfied by information      warrant
on oath that
    (a) the conditions for entry described in subsection (4) exist in
    relation to a dwelling-place;
    (b) entry to the dwelling-place is necessary for any purpose relating
    to the administration of this Act or the regulations; and
    (c) entry to the dwelling-place has been refused or there are
    reasonable grounds to believe that entry will be refused,
the justice may at any time sign and issue a warrant authorizing the
environment or peace officer named in the warrant to enter the dwelling-
place, subject to any conditions that may be specified in the warrant.
  (7) An environment officer who executes a warrant shall not use force        Use of force
unless he is accompanied by a peace officer and the use of force is
specifically authorized in the warrant.
  (8) Where an environment officer or a peace officer believes on              Seizure
reasonable grounds that an offence under this Act or the regulations has
been committed, he may seize and detain any thing

                                      9
10                     Cap. E-9                Environmental Protection Act



                            (a) by means of or in relation to which he believes on reasonable
                            grounds the offence was committed; or
                            (b) that he believes on reasonable grounds will afford evidence in
                            respect of the commission of an offence under this Act or the
                            regulations.
Warrant                  (9) Where on ex parte application a justice is satisfied by information
                       on oath that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there is in any
                       place any thing
                           (a) by means of or in relation to which an offence under this Act or
                           the regulations has been committed or is suspected of having been
                           committed; or
                           (b) that there are reasonable grounds to believe will afford evidence
                           in respect of the commission of an offence under this Act or the
                           regulations,
                       the justice may at any time sign and issue a warrant authorizing the
                       environment officer or peace officer named in the warrant to enter and
                       search the place for the thing and, subject to any conditions that may be
                       specified in the warrant, to seize and detain it.
Things liable to         (10) The environment officer or peace officer who executes a warrant
seizure                may exercise the powers described in subsection (4) and may seize and
                       detain, in addition to any thing mentioned in the warrant, any other thing
                           (a) by means of or in relation to which the inspector believes on
                           reasonable grounds an offence under this Act or regulations has
                           been committed; or
                           (b) that the inspector believes on reasonable grounds will afford
                           evidence in respect of the commission of an offence under this Act.
Execution of              (11) A warrant shall be executed by day unless the justice authorizes
warrant                its execution by night.
Where warrant not        (12) A peace officer or an environment officer may exercise any of the
necessary              powers referred to in subsections (9) and (10) without a warrant if the
                       conditions for obtaining a warrant exist, but, by reason of exigent
                       circumstances, it would not be practical to obtain a warrant.
Notice of reason for     (13) A peace officer or environment officer who seizes and detains a
seizure                thing under this Act or the regulations shall, as soon as is practicable,
                       advise the owner of the thing or the natural person having possession,
                       care, or control of it at the time of its seizure, of the reason for the
                       seizure.
Storage, removal         (14) A peace officer or environment officer who seizes and detains a
etc.                   thing under this Act or the regulations or any person designated by such
                       officer, may


                                                           10
                         Environmental Protection Act               Cap. E-9                      11



    (a) store, treat, or dispose of the thing at the place where it was
    seized or move it to any other place for storage, treatment, or
    disposition; or
    (b) recommend to the Minister that an environmental protection
    order be issued pursuant to subsection (2) directing the natural
    person who owns or had the possession, care, or control of it at the
    time of its seizure, to store, treat, or dispose of it or move it to any
    other place and store, treat, or dispose of it, in which case the
    Minister may make such an environmental protection order.
  (15) Subject to subsection (16), a thing that is seized and detained         Detention
under this Act shall not be detained after
    (a) a determination by a peace officer or an environment officer that
    the thing or use of it is in conformity with the Act or regulations or
    will not afford evidence in respect of a commission of an offence
    under this Act or the regulations; or
    (b) the expiration of one hundred and eighty days after the day of
    seizure,
unless before that time proceedings are instituted in relation to the thing,
in which case the thing may be detained until the proceedings are finally
concluded.
  (16) Where the Minister believes on reasonable and probable grounds          Disposal of
that a thing is a threat to the environment or environmental health, or        forfeited things

where proceedings mentioned in subsection (15) are instituted within the
time provided in that subsection, and at the final conclusion thereat the
court orders the forfeiture of the thing that was seized and detained, the
Minister may dispose of the thing as he sees fit.
  (17) Where subsection (16) does not apply, the thing shall be returned       Return of things
to the natural person who owns the thing or who had the possession, care       seized where no
                                                                               forfeiture ordered
or control of it at the time of its seizure.
  (18) A sample taken under this Act or regulations may be disposed of         Samples,
in such manner as the Minister considers appropriate.                          disposition of


  (19) The Crown, nor any agent or employee thereof is not liable for          Liability
any costs, loss or damage, resulting from the exercise in good faith of
powers pursuant to this Act or the regulations.
  (20) An environmental protection order issued pursuant to subsection         Order to bind
(2) shall run with the land and shall be binding upon the successor or         successors in title

assignee of the natural person to whom it is directed.
  (21) Upon the written request of any person as to whether an                 Copies of order on
environmental protection order has been issued against a particular            request

person, the Minister shall provide the information and if an

                                     11
12                  Cap. E-9                 Environmental Protection Act



                    environmental protection order has been issued, make a copy available.
                    1991,c.10,s.3; 1995,c.11,s.1; 2005,c.32.s.1; 2006,c.5,s.1; 2008,c.13,s.4.
Application         7.1 (1) This section applies to corporations.
Orders                (2) Where the Minister or an environment officer believes, on
                    reasonable and probable grounds,
                        (a) that a contaminant has been, is being, or is going to be,
                        discharged into the environment, or, otherwise, that an act or
                        omission of a corporation is or may be a contravention of this Act or
                        the regulations or otherwise be a threat to the environment or
                        environmental health; and
                        (b) that it is necessary or advisable for the protection of the
                        environment or the prevention or control of danger to human life or
                        health or of damage to property,
                    the Minister or the environment officer, as the case may be, may issue an
                    environmental protection order to
                        (c) the corporation which is the owner or previous owner of the
                        contaminant or the source of the contaminant;
                        (d) the corporation which is or was in occupation of the contaminant
                        or the source of the contaminant;
                        (e) the corporation which has, or had, the charge, management, or
                        control of the contaminant or the source of the contaminant;
                        (f) the corporation whose act or omission is or may be a
                        contravention of this Act or the regulations or otherwise be a threat
                        to the environment or environmental health; or
                        (g) one or more of the above persons.
Terms, conditions     (3) An environmental protection order issued pursuant to subsection
and requirements    (2) may specify terms and conditions, including time limits, and may
                    require the corporation to whom it is directed, at its own cost, if any, to
                        (a) meet with a representative of the Department and other persons
                        for such purposes as may be required by the environmental
                        protection order;
                        (a.1) permit inspection;
                        (b) permit testing and sampling;
                        (c) carry out inspections, testing, and sampling, including
                        professional hydro-geological or engineering investigations, to
                        determine the extent and effects of the contaminant;
                        (d) cease an activity specified in the environmental protection order
                        permanently or for the period of time specified in the environmental
                        protection order;
                        (e) clean, repair, and restore the area affected by the contaminant to
                        the extent indicated in the environmental protection order or,
                        otherwise, to the satisfaction of the Minister;


                                                         12
                        Environmental Protection Act              Cap. E-9                    13



    (f) take specified action to prevent or avoid danger to human life or
    health or damage to property or to protect the environment;
    (g) submit a written report with respect to its activities pursuant to
    clauses (c), (e) and (f);
    (h) do any or all of those things specified in clauses (a) to (g)
    forthwith or as of the future date specified in the environmental
    protection order.
  (4) For the purpose of investigating threats to the environment or         Powers of
environmental health or otherwise ensuring compliance with this Act or       environment
                                                                             officers
the regulations, an environment officer, or a peace officer may,
     (a) subject to subsections (5), (6) and (7), at any reasonable time,
     enter and inspect any place in which he believes on reasonable
     grounds there is a contaminant or any other thing in respect of which
     this Act or the regulations apply;
     (b) examine any contaminant or suspected contaminant, or any other
     thing in respect of which this Act or the regulations apply and take
     samples of it;
     (c) require any corporation to produce for inspection or copying, in
     whole or in part, any record or other document that the environment
     officer or peace officer believes on reasonable grounds contains any
     information relevant to the administration of this Act or the
     regulations; and
     (d) conduct any tests or analyses or take any measurements.
  (5) An environment officer or a peace officer may not enter a              Entry to dwelling-
dwelling-place except with the consent of the occupant of the dwelling-      place

place or under the authority of a warrant.
  (6) Where on ex parte application a justice is satisfied by information    Authority to issue
on oath that                                                                 warrant

    (a) the conditions for entry described in subsection (4) exist in
    relation to a dwelling-place;
    (b) entry to the dwelling-place is necessary for any purpose relating
    to the administration of this Act or the regulations; and
    (c) entry to the dwelling-place has been refused or there are
    reasonable grounds to believe that entry will be refused,
the justice may at any time sign and issue a warrant authorizing the
environment or peace officer named in the warrant to enter the dwelling-
place, subject to any conditions that may be specified in the warrant.
  (7) An environment officer who executes a warrant shall not use force      Use of force
unless he is accompanied by a peace officer and the use of force is
specifically authorized in the warrant.



                                    13
14                     Cap. E-9                 Environmental Protection Act



                         (8) Where an environment officer or a peace officer believes on
Seizure
                       reasonable grounds that an offence under this Act or the regulations has
                       been committed, he may seize and detain any thing
                           (a) by means of or in relation to which he believes on reasonable
                           grounds the offence was committed; or
                           (b) that he believes on reasonable grounds will afford evidence in
                           respect of the commission of an offence under this Act or the
                           regulations.
Warrant                  (9) Where on ex parte application a justice is satisfied by information
                       on oath that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there is in any
                       place any thing
                           (a) by means of or in relation to which an offence under this Act or
                           the regulations has been committed or is suspected of having been
                           committed; or
                           (b) that there are reasonable grounds to believe will afford evidence
                           in respect of the commission of an offence under this Act or the
                           regulations,
                       the justice may at any time sign and issue a warrant authorizing the
                       environment officer or peace officer named in the warrant to enter and
                       search the place for the thing and, subject to any conditions that may be
                       specified in the warrant, to seize and detain it.
Things liable to
seizure                  (10) The environment officer or peace officer who executes a warrant
                       may exercise the powers described in subsection (4) and may seize and
                       detain, in addition to any thing mentioned in the warrant, any other thing
                           (a) by means of or in relation to which the inspector believes on
                           reasonable grounds an offence under this Act or regulations has
                           been committed; or
                           (b) that the inspector believes on reasonable grounds will afford
                           evidence in respect of the commission of an offence under this Act.
Execution of              (11) A warrant shall be executed by day unless the justice authorizes
warrant                its execution by night.
Where warrant not        (12) A peace officer or an environment officer may exercise any of the
necessary              powers referred to in subsections (9) and (10) without a warrant if the
                       conditions for obtaining a warrant exist, but, by reason of exigent
                       circumstances, it would not be practical to obtain a warrant.
Notice of reason for     (13) A peace officer or environment officer who seizes and detains a
seizure                thing under this Act or the regulations shall, as soon as is practicable,
                       advise the owner of the thing or the corporation having possession, care,
                       or control of it at the time of its seizure, of the reason for the seizure.




                                                            14
                         Environmental Protection Act               Cap. E-9                      15



  (14) A peace officer or environment officer who seizes and detains a
                                                                               Storage, removal
thing under this Act or the regulations or any person designated by such       etc.
officer, may
     (a) store, treat, or dispose of the thing at the place where it was
     seized or move it to any other place for storage, treatment, or
     disposition; or
     (b) recommend to the Minister that an environmental protection
     order be issued pursuant to subsection (2) directing the corporation
     which owns or had the possession, care, or control of it at the time of
     its seizure, to store, treat, or dispose of it or move it to any other
     place and store, treat, or dispose of it, in which case the Minister
     may make such an environmental protection order.
  (15) Subject to subsection (16), a thing that is seized and detained         Detention
under this Act shall not be detained after
    (a) a determination by a peace officer or an environment officer that
    the thing or use of it is in conformity with the Act or regulations or
    will not afford evidence in respect of a commission of an offence
    under this Act or the regulations; or
    (b) the expiration of one hundred and eighty days after the day of
    seizure,
unless before that time proceedings are instituted in relation to the thing,
in which case the thing may be detained until the proceedings are finally
concluded.
                                                                               Disposal of
  (16) Where the Minister believes on reasonable and probable grounds          forfeited things
that a thing is a threat to the environment or environmental health, or
where proceedings mentioned in subsection (15) are instituted within the
time provided in that subsection, and at the final conclusion thereat the
court orders the forfeiture of the thing that was seized and detained, the
Minister may dispose of the thing as he sees fit.
  (17) Where subsection (16) does not apply, the thing shall be returned       Return of things
to the corporation which owns the thing or which had the possession,           seized where no
                                                                               forfeiture ordered
care or control of it at the time of its seizure.
  (18) A sample taken under this Act or regulations may be disposed of         Samples,
in such manner as the Minister considers appropriate.                          disposition of


  (19) The Crown, nor any agent or employee thereof is not liable for          Liability
any costs, loss or damage, resulting from the exercise in good faith of
powers pursuant to this Act or the regulations.
  (20) An environmental protection order issued pursuant to subsection         Environmental
(2) shall run with the land and shall be binding upon the successor or         protection order to
                                                                               bind successors in
assignee of the corporation to which it is directed.                           title



                                     15
16                    Cap. E-9                 Environmental Protection Act



                        (21) Upon the written request of any person as to whether an
Copies of
environmental
                      environmental protection order has been issued against a particular
protection order on   person, the Minister shall provide the information and if an
request               environmental protection order has been issued, make a copy available.
                      1991,c.10,s.3; 1995,c.11,s.2; 2005,c.32,s.2; 2006,c.5,s.2; 2008,c.13,s.5.
Analysis              8. (1) The Minister may, for purposes of this Act or the regulations,
                      designate any person as an analyst, and the person so designated may,
                      with respect to any sample analyzed by him, issue a certificate of
                      analysis.
Certificate             (2) A certificate of an analyst stating that he has analyzed or examined
                      a sample submitted by an environment officer or other person authorized
                      by the Minister and stating the results of his analysis or examination, is
                      admissible in evidence in any legal proceeding or prosecution under this
                      Act or the regulations, without proof of the signature or official character
                      of the person appearing to have signed the certificate of analysis and, in
                      the absence of any evidence to the contrary, is proof of the statements
                      contained in the certificate of analysis.
Attendance of           (3) The party against whom a certificate of analysis is produced under
analyst in court      subsection (1) may, with leave of the court, require the attendance of the
                      analyst for purposes of cross-examination. 1988,c.19,s.8.

                                   ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT
Undertakings          9. (1) No person shall initiate any undertaking unless that person first
                      files a written proposal with the Department and obtains from the
                      Minister written approval to proceed with the proposed undertaking.
Environmental           (2) The Minister, in considering a proposal submitted pursuant to
impact information    subsection (1), may
                          (a) require the person submitting it to supply such additional
                          information as the Minister considers necessary;
                          (b) require that person to carry out an environmental impact
                          assessment and submit an environmental impact statement;
                          (c) notify the public of the proposal and provide opportunity for
                          comment.
Form and content        (3) An environmental assessment and environmental impact statement
                      shall have such content as the Minister may direct.
Form of statement      (3.1) An environmental impact statement shall be in such form as the
                      Minister may direct.
Fees                    (3.2) A person who is required to submit an environmental impact
                      statement under subsection (2) shall pay such fees as and when may be

                                                           16
                         Environmental Protection Act               Cap. E-9                       17



required by the regulations for the Department’s review of the
environmental impact statement.
  (4) The approval required by this section is in addition to any other        Saving
requirement imposed by the province or a municipality. 1988,c.19,s.9;
2004,c.4,s.1.
9.1 (1) In this section, “C & D disposal site” means a construction and        C & D disposal site,
demolition debris disposal site used for the disposal of C & D debris.         defined


   (2) On the coming into force of this subsection, no approval may be         Approval may not
issued by the Minister pursuant to subsection 9(1) of this Act in respect      be issued

of a proposal for a C & D disposal site.
  (3) For greater certainty, subsection (2) shall not be construed to          Validity of earlier
    (a) terminate or otherwise affect the validity of any approval issued      approvals

    before the commencement of that subsection; or
    (b) affect the ability of the Minister to issue permits under the
    regulations in respect of C & D disposal sites for which an approval
    was issued under section 9 prior to the commencement of that
    subsection.
                                                                               Proposals
  (4) This section applies to every proposal that was made, and not
decided by the Minister, before the date this section comes into force,
including any proposal that has been or is subject to court proceedings.
  (5) This section is repealed.                                                Repeal

  (6) This section, other than subsection (5), comes into force on assent.     Commencement

  (7) Subsection (5) comes into force on a date that may be fixed by           Idem
proclamation of the Lieutenant Governor in Council. 2005,c.33,s.1.
10. Repealed by 2008,c.13.s.6. 1988,c.19,s.10; 1991,c.10,s.4;                  watercourse
1992,c.21,s.4; 1999,c.24,s.2; 2001,c.34,s.2; 2002,c.5,s.2; 2006,c.5,s.3;       boundary

2008,c.13,s.6.
11. Repealed by 2008,c.13.s.6. 1991,c.10,s.5; 2008,c.13,s.6.                   Advisory
                                                                               Committee
11.1 Repealed by 2008,c.13.s.6. 1999,c.24,s.3, 4.1; 2001,c.34,s.3;             Definitions
2005,c.32,s.3; 2008,c.13,s.6
11.2 Repealed     by    2008,c.13.s.6.      2001,c.34,s.4;   2002,c.5,s.5,6;   Prohibition
2008,c.13,s.7.
11.3 Repealed by 2008,c.13.s.6. 1999,c.24,s.5;               2001,c.34,s.5;    Forested riparian
2001,c.5,s.1; 2002,c.5,s.7,8; 2008,c.13,s.6.                                   zone




                                     17
18                    Cap. E-9                Environmental Protection Act



                      11.4 Repealed by 2008,c.13.s.6.            1999,c.24,s.5;   2001,c.34,s.6;
Cutting or removing
trees
                      2002,c.5,s.9; 2008,c.13,s.6.
Permit                11.5 Repealed by 2008,c.13.s.6. 2002,c.5,s.10; 2008,c.13,s.6.

                                                       WELLS
Wells                 12. Except in accordance with the regulations, no person shall
                          (a) engage in the business of drilling wells;
                          (b) undertake the construction of a well; or
                          (c) undertake any operation incidental to the reconstruction or
                          abandonment of a well. 1988, c.19, s.12.

                                           BULK WATER REMOVAL
Water transfer or     12.1 (1) No person shall drill for, extract, take or use groundwater for
removal               the purpose of transfer or removal from the province.
Idem                    (2) No person shall extract, remove or withdraw water from any water
                      basin, watercourse or other surface water body in the province for the
                      purpose of transfer or removal from the province.
Exceptions
                        (3) Subsections (1) and (2) do not apply to water
                          (a) that is to be used for drinking water purposes and is packaged in
                          Prince Edward Island in containers having a capacity of not more
                          than 25 litres; or
                          (b) that is removed in the ordinary course of carrying water in a
                          vehicle, vessel or aircraft for use by persons or animals while they
                          are being transported in it.
Idem                    (4) Subsections (1) and (2) do not apply to water
                          (a) that is removed in a vessel, vehicle or aircraft and is necessary
                          for
                             (i) the ordinary operation of the vehicle, vessel or aircraft, or
                             (ii) the transport of food or products in the vehicle, vessel or
                             aircraft; or
                          (b) that is removed, with the written permission of the Minister, to
                          meet short-term safety, security or humanitarian needs.
                          2001,c.34,s.7.

                            WASTE TREATMENT AND WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS
Approval required     13. (1) No person shall undertake the establishment of a waste treatment
                      system or water supply system, or shall change any existing system,
                      without first obtaining written approval from the Minister.



                                                          18
                         Environmental Protection Act              Cap. E-9                       19



  (2) An application for approval pursuant to subsection (1) shall be
                                                                              Plans and detailed
supported by the plans and specifications of the waste treatment system       information
or water supply system and the work to be undertaken, and such other
information as the Minister may require.
  (3) Where it appears to the Minister that any person has contravened        Investigation and
subsection (1), the Minister may order an investigation of the violation      remedial action

and may order the person to take such action as the Minister considers
necessary. 1988,c.19,s.13.
14. (1) Where the Minister is satisfied that for the purpose of protecting    Minister may order
the environment or environmental health it is necessary to do so he may,      system

by order, require that an area be served by a water supply system or
waste treatment system.
  (2) An order under subsection (1), shall be directed to the person          Idem
causing or likely to cause the hazard to the environment or
environmental health. 1988,c.19,s.14.
15. Repealed by 1992,c.21,s.5.                                                Alterations

16. Waste treatment and water supply systems shall at all times be            Maintenance
maintained and operated in such manner and with such facilities as the
Minister may direct. 1988,c.19,s.16.
                                                                              Entry on private
17. When the Minister finds it necessary that any public utility locate any   property
portion of a waste treatment system or water supply system on private
property and that no agreement can be reached with the owner, the
Minister may order, subject to the approval of the Lieutenant Governor
in Council, on such terms and conditions and subject to the payment of
such compensation, if any, as may seem just, that the public utility have
leave to enter upon the private property and there locate any portion of a
system and have access thereto at all times for repairing, operating or
maintaining the same. 1988,c.19,s.17.
18. (1) The Lieutenant Governor in Council may, by order, create a body       Water and sewerage
to acquire, construct, establish, alter, extend, control, manage, maintain,   corporations

or operate any waste treatment system, waste management system or
water supply system, and may constitute a body so created a body
corporate for the purposes of the Act and may
     (a) prescribe its name, composition and functions;
     (b) prescribe the manner of appointment of its members and their
     terms of office;
     (c) prescribe the functions of the corporation; and
     (d) subject to section 18.1, exempt the corporation and any works
     operated by it in whole or in part from the provisions of the Island


                                     19
20                    Cap. E-9                 Environmental Protection Act



                           Regulatory and Appeals Commission Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap. I-11,
                           and the Water and Sewerage Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap. W-2.
Powers                 (2) A corporation constituted under subsection (1), or the Minister,
                      may
                          (a) acquire, construct, establish, alter, extend, control, manage, and
                          operate waste treatment systems, waste management systems and
                          water supply systems;
                          (b) provide and supply water to a municipality or person;
                          (c) receive, treat, or dispose of sewage for a municipality or person;
                          (d) make agreements with a municipality or person with respect to
                          the operation of a waste treatment system or water supply system, or
                          the reception, treatment and disposal of sewage;
                          (e) acquire, alienate, hold, dispose of real or personal property;
                          (f) engage and pay personnel;
                          (g) subject to section 18.1, assess, charge, and collect fees for
                          services to a municipality or person;
                          (h) operate a waste treatment system or water supply system on
                          behalf of government, municipality or person;
                          (i) perform any function authorized by the Lieutenant Governor in
                          Council;
                          (j) prescribe the remuneration of its members;
                          (k) establish a system for the collection, transportation, separation,
                          treatment or disposal of waste.
Power to levy rates
                         (3) A corporation constituted under subsection (1) may levy rates in
                      respect of water and sewerage services and for the collection,
                      transportation, separation, treatment and disposal of waste.
Maximum frontage        (4) Rates may be levied by a corporation constituted under subsection
upon which rate       (1) for water or sewerage services by means of frontage charges and
may be levied
                      where rates are so levied, the maximum frontage of any parcel of land in
                      respect of which rates may be levied is five hundred feet if the parcel
                      qualifies for a farm assessment under the Real Property Assessment Act
                      R.S.P.E.I. 1988,Cap. R-4.
Lien                    (5) Rates levied pursuant to subsection (3) constitute a lien on the real
                      property on which the rate is levied until payment is made and that lien
                      has priority over every claim, privilege or encumbrance of every person,
                      except the Crown against that property.
Service deemed to       (6) For the purposes of this Act, a person along whose lands run sewer
be received           or water mains shall be deemed to receive service notwithstanding that
                      such sewer or water mains are not physically connected by lateral lines to
                      any residence, building or other structure situate upon the said lands of


                                                           20
                           Environmental Protection Act            Cap. E-9                   21



such person. 1988,c.19,s.18; 1989,c.9,s.2; 1991,c.10,s.6; 1991,c.18,s.22;
1995,c.11.s.3; 2005,c.34,s.1.
18.1 (1) In this section                                                      Definitions

    (a) “Commission” means the Island Regulatory and Appeals                  Commission
    Commission established under the Island Regulatory and Appeals
    Commission Act;
    (b) “Corporation” means the Island Waste Management Corporation           Corporation
    established by an order made under section 18;
    (c) “current rate” means a rate that is charged, on the day before this   current rate
    section comes into force, by the Corporation for a service it
    provides;
    (d) “service” means a service respecting the collection,                  service
    transportation, separation, treatment and disposal of waste.
  (2) When the Corporation wishes to vary the rates for any existing          Submission of rates
services, or to establish rates for any new services, the Corporation shall   for review and
                                                                              approval
submit for the review and approval of the Commission
    (a) a schedule of the proposed rates together with a description of
    the services to which they relate and any conditions or terms of
    service that are to apply in respect of those rates;
    (b) a submission justifying or explaining the proposed rates; and
    (c) such other information concerning the proposed rates and the
    financial affairs of the Corporation as the Commission may require.
                                                                              Review by
  (3) On receipt of a submission by the Corporation made in accordance        Commission
with subsection (2), the Commission
    (a) shall cause notice of the submission to be published that invites
    written submissions from the public; and
    (b) after allowing such time as the Commission considers
    appropriate
    for public submissions to be made, shall review the submission of
    the Corporation and any written submissions of the public that the
    Commission has received.
 (4) After reviewing the submissions referred to in subsection (3), the       Decision of
Commission may, subject to subsection (9),                                    Commission

   (a) approve the rates proposed by the Corporation;
   (b) determine and fix new rates; or
   (c) refuse the rates proposed and confirm the existing rates.
   (5) The Commission shall make a decision under subsection (5) not          Decision in 60 days
later than 60 days from the date of the submission by the Corporation
under subsection (2).

                                       21
22                     Cap. E-9                 Environmental Protection Act



                         (6) Subject to subsection (7), the rates that are approved, determined
Rates chargeable
                       and fixed or confirmed by the Commissioner under this section are the
                       lawful rates of the Corporation until altered or modified under this
                       section.
Current rates           (7) The current rates of the Corporation are the lawful rates of the
                       Corporation until altered under this section.
Lawful rates             (8) The Corporation shall not charge, and shall not be entitled to
                       collect with respect to the provision of a service, any rate other than one
                       that is a lawful rate as determined by or under this section.
Corporation entitled     (9) When making a decision in respect of a submission by the
to recover costs       Corporation, the Commission shall allow the Corporation to earn,
                       annually or within such other period as the Commission considers
                       appropriate, such return from its rates for each type of service the
                       Corporation provides as the Commission considers is just and reasonable
                       to recover the costs incurred by the Corporation to provide that type of
                       service.
Earnings                 (10) The Commission may allow the Corporation to earn, in addition
                       to the return required by subsection (8), such amount as the Commission
                       considers appropriate in respect of the operation of the Corporation.
                       2005,c.34,s.1
Saving                 19. The power vested in the Island Regulatory and Appeals Commission
                       to set sewer and water rates is not affected by this Act except where
                       otherwise provided under clause 18(1)(d). 1988,c.19,s.19;
                       1991,c.18,s.22.

                                        DISCHARGE OF CONTAMINANTS
Spills                 20. Except as permitted by the Pesticides Control Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988, P-
                       4, the regulations or with the written permission of the Minister no
                       person shall
                            (a) discharge, or cause or permit to be discharged;
                            (b) being the owner or person having control of a contaminant,
                            discharge or cause or permit to be discharged,
                       a contaminant into the environment. 1992,c.21,s.6; 2001,c.34,s.8.
Notice and remedial    21. (1) Every person who, without permission under section 20,
measures               discharges, or causes or permits to be discharged, a contaminant into the
                       environment, or who owns or has control of a contaminant which is
                       discharged into the environment shall
                            (a) immediately notify the Department; and
                            (b) take such action as the Minister may direct


                                                            22
                         Environmental Protection Act               Cap. E-9                     23



       (i) to investigate and define the extent, nature and impact of the
       contaminant,
       (ii) to repair, restore and remedy the environment or to confine or
       contain the effects of the contaminant.
  (2) Where any person fails to take such action as is directed by the         Injunction
Minister pursuant to subsection (1), and where the discharge of a
contaminant into the environment has caused, is causing or may cause a
threat to the environment or environmental health, the Minister may
make application to the Supreme Court for an injunction requiring that
person to carry out that action. 1992,c.21,s.7.

                       CONTAMINATED SITES
21.1 (1) The Minister shall establish a contaminated sites registry.           Contaminated sites
                                                                               registry
  (2) The Minister                                                             Access to registry,
    (a) shall provide for access by the public to information in the           fees

    registry; and
    (b) may impose fees, in accordance with the regulations, for
    providing access to or supplying information from the registry.
  (3) Subject to this section, where, after considering the evidence,          Designation of
standards and criteria that the Minister considers relevant, and all           contaminated sites

regulations made under clause 25(1)(w), the Minister is of the opinion
that an area of the environment is a contaminated site, the Minister may
designate that area of the environment as a contaminated site.
                                                                               Entry of
  (4) The Minister shall cause areas of the environment designated as          contaminated sites
contaminated sites to be entered into the contaminated sites registry.         in registry


  (5) The Minister shall, before designating an area of the environment        Notice of
as a contaminated site,                                                        designation

     (a) give notice, in writing, to the registered owner, and to any
     occupier, of the area of the Minister’s intention to designate the area
     as a contaminated site; and
     (b) provide a reasonable opportunity for the registered owner, and to
     any occupier, of the area, to comment on the Minister’s intention to
     designate the area of the environment as a contaminated site.
  (6) The Minister may postpone a designation under subsection (3) in          Postponement of
respect of an area of the environment if                                       designation

    (a) the registered owner, or any occupier, of the area enters into an
    agreement with the Department, satisfactory to the Minister, for the
    repair, restoration and remediation of the area; and
    (b) the registered owner, or any occupier, of the area, as the case
    may be, complies, to the Minister’s satisfaction, with the agreement.

                                     23
24                      Cap. E-9                  Environmental Protection Act



                          (7) The Minister shall, after designating an area of the environment as
Notice of
designation
                        a contaminated site under subsection (3), give written notice of the
                        designation, together with reasons for the designation, to the registered
                        owner, and to any occupier, of the area.
Alteration of             (8) After an area of the environment has been designated as a
contaminated sites      contaminated site, the registered owner, or any occupier, of the
                        contaminated site shall not alter the contaminated site unless the
                        registered owner, or occupier, of the contaminated site, as the case may
                        be, first obtains the written authorization of the Minister to do so.
Requirement for           (9) The Minister may, on written application, issue a written
further research,       authorization referred to in subsection (8) and may require any person
etc.
                        who makes the application to provide any information, research, or study
                        the Minister considers necessary to assess the application.
Orders relating to        (10) A copy of an environmental protection order issued under this Act
contaminated sites      in respect of an area of the environment that is designated as a
                        contaminated site shall be placed in the contaminated sites registry.
Cancellation of           (11) Where the Minister is of the opinion that the area of the
designation             environment is no longer a contaminated site, the Minister shall
                            (a) cancel the designation of a contaminated site made under
                            subsection (3); and
                            (b) cause the removal of the designation from the contaminated sites
                            registry. 2004,c.30,s.2; 2008,c.13,s.7.

                                             SAND DUNES AND BEACHES
Operation of motor      22. (1) No person shall, without written permission of the Minister,
vehicles                     (a) operate a motor vehicle on a beach or a sand dune;
                             (b) carry out any activity that will or may
                                (i) interfere with the natural supply or movement of sand to or
                                within a beach or a sand dune,
                                (ii) alter, remove, or destroy natural stabilizing features, including
                                vegetation, of a beach or a sand dune.
Activities related to      (2) Clause (1)(a) does not apply to the operation of a motor vehicle on
moss harvesting etc.    a beach for the conduct of activities related to the legal harvesting of a
excepted
                        fishery resource or the legal removal of beach material. 1991,c.10,s.7.
Idem                    23. Repealed by 1991,c.10,s.8.

                                                        LITTERING
Litter                  24. No person shall deposit litter
                            (a) upon any land not approved by the Minister for this purpose; or

                                                              24
                         Environmental Protection Act               Cap. E-9                 25



    (b) into or upon any watercourse or wetland. 1988,c.19,s.24;
    2001,c.34,s.9.

                            REGULATIONS
25. (1) The Lieutenant Governor in Council may make such regulations           Regulations
as the Lieutenant Governor in Council considers necessary or advisable
for the enhancement and protection of the environment, and without
limiting the generality of the foregoing, may make regulations,
     (a) respecting environmental impact assessments and ensuring
     specific opportunity for public involvement in the screening and
     assessment of undertakings;
     (b) establishing environmental quality standards for part or all of the
     province;
     (c) respecting the licenses, permits, endorsements on permits,
     approvals, certificates, exemptions, variances, management plans,
     material stewardship plans and other authorizations required to be
     held by persons under this Act or the regulations in respect of the
     carrying on of an activity or undertaking,
     including regulations respecting
        (i) the process for applying for any such an authorization,
        (ii) the issuance, approval, refusal, renewal, expiration,
        amendment, suspension or revocation of any such authorization,
        (iii) the qualifications or requirements for, or the circumstances
        or standards applicable to, any decision referred to in subclause
        (ii), and
        (iv) the imposition of terms and conditions on any such
        authorization and the alteration of or requirement for compliance
        with such terms and conditions;
     (d) respecting the fees that are payable in respect of
        (i) an application for a license, permit, endorsement on a permit or
        certificate,
        (ii) an inspection,
        (iii) waste management,
        (iv) a record search,
        (v) the review of an environmental impact statement, and
        (vi) such other matters or services provided under the Act or the
        regulations.
     (e) respecting the design, location, configuration, construction,
     adaption, alteration, operation, maintenance and installation of
     undertakings;
     (f) respecting plumbing standards, prescribing the use and
     application of the plumbing standards, and requiring a person to
     obtain a permit before plumbing is installed or altered;


                                     25
26   Cap. E-9                  Environmental Protection Act



          (g) respecting the design, construction, adaption, alteration,
          operation, maintenance and installation of systems, processes or
          works to abate, manage, dispose of or control contaminants, waste
          or other environmental damage, and those systems, processes or
          works may include waste management sites, waste treatment
          systems and incinerators;
          (h) regulating or prohibiting the collection, sale, storage, use,
          treatment, distribution and disposal of contaminants;
          (i) prescribing limits, terms and conditions on the release of
          contaminants and the prohibition of release of contaminants from
          any undertaking;
          (j) regulating or prohibiting the collection, sale, storage, use,
          treatment, distribution and disposal of any product, container,
          including beverage containers, or other substance that may adversely
          affect the environment;
          (k) respecting wells and attachments thereto and the licensing of
          well drillers;
          (l) regulating, controlling, prohibiting, directing, or providing for the
          withdrawal, use, quality, quality monitoring, storage and handling of
          water from any natural or artificial source including any water
          supply system;
          (l.1) requiring delineation of well-head protection areas and
          respecting the implementation of controls on activity within the
          well-head protection area which may include the restriction and
          prohibition of any activity in the area;
          (m) prohibiting the alteration of any watercourse, or wetland, or the
          water flow therein unless the alteration is
              (i) authorized by a license or permit issued under the regulations
              and the alteration is carried out in accordance with any terms or
              conditions imposed on such a license or permit, or
              (ii) permitted by an exception or exemption set out in the
              regulations;
          (m.1) regulating, controlling, and providing for, the alteration of
          any watercourse, or wetland, or the water flow therein, including
          regulations
              (i) requiring a license or permit issued under the regulations to
              carry on the alteration, and
              (ii) respecting    the    manner,     circumstances,     exceptions,
              exemptions, standards and conditions under which the alteration
              may be carried on;
          (m.2) prohibiting the carrying on of any activity specified in the
          regulations in or on a watercourse or wetland, including
              (i) the draining, pumping or diverting of water from a
              watercourse or wetland,


                                           26
                    Environmental Protection Act               Cap. E-9   27



   (ii) the dredging, excavating or removal of soil, mud, sand,
   stones, rubbish, rocks, aggregate or other material or objects of
   any kind from a watercourse or wetland,
   (iii) the dumping, infilling or deposition of soil, water, mud,
   sand, stones, rubbish, litter, rocks, aggregate or other material of
   any kind into a watercourse or wetland,
   (iv) the construction, placement, repair, replacement, demolition
   or removal of buildings, structures or obstructions of any kind,
   including bridges, culverts, breakwaters, dams, docks, slipways
   and flood or erosion protection works,
   (v) the operation of any heavy equipment or a motor vehicle on
   the sediment bed, beach or bank of a watercourse or on a wetland,
   (vi) the disturbance, removal, alteration, disruption or destruction
   of the ground, either by excavating or depositing earthen or other
   material,
   (vii) the disturbance, alteration, destruction or removal of
   vegetation of any kind in or on a watercourse or wetland,
   including but not limited to the cutting down of live trees or live
   shrubs, or
   (viii) the carrying on of any type of watercourse or wetland
   enhancement activity, including but not limited to debris removal,
   habitat development, or the placement of structures,
unless the activity is authorized by a license or permit issued under
the regulations and the activity is carried on in accordance with any
terms or conditions imposed on such license, permit or certificate, or
unless the activity is permitted by an exception or exemption set out
in the regulations;
(m.3) regulating, controlling or providing for the carrying on of any
activity specified in the regulations, including any activity referred
to in clause (m.2), in or on a watercourse or wetland, including
regulations
   (i) requiring a license, permit or certificate issued under the
   regulations to carry on that activity, and
   (ii) respecting    the    manner,      circumstances,    exceptions,
   exemptions, standards and conditions under which that activity
   may be carried on;
(n) requiring an environmental permit for the construction or
operation of certain undertakings, and the issuance or withdrawal of
the permits;
(o) respecting the methods of analyzing samples and prescribing the
equipment or apparatus or structures to be used for taking samples;
(p) respecting chemical or petroleum storage tank systems;
(q) regulating the disposal of litter;
(r) prescribing forms;


                                27
28   Cap. E-9                  Environmental Protection Act



          (s) respecting wastewater emissions;
          (t) respecting emissions into the air;
          (u) respecting excavation pits;
          (v) controlling, restricting or prohibiting any act for the purpose of
          abating noise or controlling noise levels;
          (w) respecting the standards and criteria to be used for the purpose
          of designating an area of the environment as a contaminated site;
          (x) respecting agreements made under subsection 21.1(6) for the
          repair, restoration and remediation of contaminated sites pursuant to
          subsection 21.1(3);
          (y) respecting the contaminated sites registry and its operation,
          including the location and hours of the offices of the Registry;
          (z) respecting assessment and rehabilitation criteria of contaminated
          sites and contaminant releases pursuant to subclause 21(1)(b)(ii);
          (aa) for the purposes of subsection 21.1(8), defining the word
          “alter”, or describing the actions pertaining to, or the uses of, an area
          of the environment designated as a contaminated site that constitute
          an alteration of that area;
          (bb) respecting the cancellation and removal of a designation of a
          contaminated site from the contaminated sites registry;
          (cc) defining words, phrases or terms that are used in this Act or the
          regulations and that are not defined in this Act;
          (dd) respecting the geographic information system database
          maintained by the Department that is called the “Prince Edward
          Island Wetland Inventory”, including regulations respecting
              (i) the maintenance, amendment, publication, inspection and the
              proof of the contents of the Inventory,
              (ii) the identification in the Inventory of areas of the province
              that are wetlands, and
              (iii) the categorization of wetlands in the Inventory as open
              water, deep marsh, shallow marsh, salt marsh, seasonally flooded
              flats, brackish marsh, shrub swamp, wooded swamp, bog or
              meadow;
          (ee) prohibiting the alteration or the disturbance of the ground or
          soil within a prescribed distance of the landward side of a
          watercourse boundary or a wetland boundary unless the alteration or
          disturbance is
              (i) authorized by a license or permit issued under the regulations
              and the alteration or disturbance is carried out in accordance with
              any terms or conditions imposed on such license or permit, or
              (ii) permitted by an exception or exemption set out in the
              regulations;
          (ff) regulating, controlling or providing for the alteration or the
          disturbance of the ground or soil within a prescribed distance of the


                                           28
                    Environmental Protection Act               Cap. E-9   29



landward side of a watercourse boundary or a wetland boundary,
including regulations
   (i) requiring a license or permit issued under the regulations
   authorizing the carrying on of that alteration or disturbance, and
   (i) respecting the manner, circumstances, exceptions, exemptions,
   standards and conditions under which that alteration or
   disturbance may be carried on;
(gg) prohibiting the carrying on of any activity specified in the
regulations within a prescribed distance of the landward side of a
watercourse boundary or a wetland boundary, including
   (i) the draining or pumping of water;
   (ii) the dredging, excavating or removal of soil, mud, sand,
   stones, rubbish, rocks, aggregate or other material of any kind,
   (iii) the dumping, infilling or deposition of soil, water, mud,
   sand, stones, rubbish, rocks, aggregate or other material or objects
   of any kind,
   (iv) the construction, placement, repair, replacement, demolition
   or removal of buildings, structures or obstructions of any kind,
   including but not limited to bridges, culverts, breakwaters, dams,
   wharves, docks, slipways and flood or erosion protection works,
   (v) the operation of any heavy equipment or a motor vehicle,
   (vi) the disturbance, removal, alteration, disruption or destruction
   of the ground, either by excavation or depositing earthen or other
   material,
   (vii) the disturbance, removal, alteration, disruption or
   destruction of vegetation, either by excavation or depositing
   earthen or other material,
   (viii) the cutting down of live trees or live shrubs,
   (ix) the planting and cultivation of an agricultural crop, or
   (x) the spraying or application of any pesticide in any manner,
unless the activity is authorized by a license or permit issued under
the regulations and the activity is carried on in accordance with any
terms or conditions attached to such license or permit, or unless the
activity is permitted by an exception or exemption set out in the
regulations;
(hh) regulating, controlling or providing for the carrying on of any
activity specified in the regulations, including any activity referred
to in clause (gg), in or on a watercourse or wetland, including
regulations
   (i) requiring a license or permit issued under the regulations
   authorizing the carrying on of that activity, and
   (ii) respecting    the   manner,      circumstances,     exceptions,
   exemptions, standards and conditions under which that activity
   may be carried on;


                                29
30   Cap. E-9                 Environmental Protection Act



          (ii) prohibiting the cultivation of any row crop or any portion
          thereof within a prescribed distance of the landward side of a
          watercourse boundary or a wetland boundary, unless the cultivation
          is authorized by a written exemption or variance issued under, or
          permitted by an exception set out in, the regulations;
          (jj) regulating, controlling or providing for the cultivation of any
          row crop or portion thereof within a prescribed distance of the
          landward side of a watercourse boundary or a wetland boundary,
          including regulations
              (i) requiring a written exemption or variance issued under the
              regulations authorizing the carrying on of that cultivation, and
              (ii) respecting the manner, circumstances, exceptions, standards
              or conditions under which that cultivation may be carried on;
          (kk) respecting the geographic information system database
          maintained by the Department that is called the “Prince Edward
          Island Sloped Land Inventory”, including regulations
              (i) respecting the maintenance, amendment, publication,
              inspection and the proof of the contents of the Inventory, and
              (ii) deeming the areas of land identified in the Inventory as
              having a slope of greater than 9% and an area of at least one
              hectare, or as having such other characteristics as the regulations
              may specify;
          (ll) prohibiting on a provincial parcel of land, the cultivation of one
          or more hectares of a row crop on any area of that parcel which has
          a slope greater than 9%, unless there is a management plan for the
          provincial parcel of land and the cultivation of the row crop is
          carried on in accordance with that management plan;
          (mm) regulating, controlling or providing for, on a provincial parcel
          of land, the cultivation of one or more hectares of a row crop on any
          area of that parcel which has a slope greater than 9%, unless there is
          a management plan for the provincial parcel of land and the
          cultivation of the row crop is carried on in accordance with that
          management plan;
          (nn) respecting management plans, including the contents,
          components, establishment, approval, terms and conditions,
          amendment, maintenance, expiry and revocation of management
          plans;
          (oo) respecting the appointment of management specialists and
          respecting their powers and duties in respect of management plans
          or other matters;
          (pp) requiring the owner and operator of an intensive livestock
          operation to ensure that no livestock waste from the intensive
          livestock operation enters any watercourse or wetland;



                                          30
                      Environmental Protection Act                 Cap. E-9   31



(qq) prohibiting, within a prescribed distance of the landward side
of a watercourse boundary or a wetland boundary,
    (i) the construction of an intensive livestock operation, or the
    construction of any building, structure, facility, or any part
    thereof, of an intensive livestock operation,
    (ii) the construction of a new building, structure or facility, or
    any part thereof, or the expansion or renovation of existing
    buildings, structures or facilities, of an existing intensive livestock
    operation, or
    (iii) the carrying on of any activity connected or associated with,
    or supporting, an activity referred to in clause (i) or (ii),
unless such activity or undertaking is carried on under a written
authorization issued under the regulations, or unless the activity or
undertaking is permitted by an exception set out in the regulations;
(rr) regulating, controlling or providing for the carrying on of any
activity or undertaking referred to in clause (qq) within a prescribed
distance of the landward side of a watercourse boundary or a
wetland boundary, including regulations
    (i) requiring a written authorization issued under the regulations
    to carry on that activity or undertaking, and
    (ii) respecting    the     manner,      circumstances,      exceptions,
    exemptions, standards and conditions under which that activity or
    undertaking may be carried on;
(ss) prohibiting the keeping of livestock, in a density greater than
the maximum prescribed number of animal units per acre of living
space, within a prescribed distance of the landward side of a
watercourse boundary or a wetland boundary, unless the keeping of
livestock in such a density and within such a distance of the
landward side of a watercourse boundary or a wetland boundary is
authorized in writing by the Minister, or unless it is permitted by an
excepting set out in the regulations;
(tt) regulating, controlling or providing for the keeping of livestock
within a prescribed distance of the landward side of a watercourse
boundary or a wetland boundary, respecting the density of livestock,
as measured in terms of the number of prescribed animal units per
acre of living space or otherwise, that may be kept within a
prescribed distance of the landward side of a watercourse boundary
or wetland boundary, including regulations
    (i) requiring a written authorization issued under the regulations
    for the keeping of livestock, in a density in excess of the
    maximum density established by the regulations, within a
    prescribed distance of the landward side of a watercourse
    boundary or a wetland boundary, and



                                  31
32   Cap. E-9                  Environmental Protection Act



              (ii) respecting the manner, circumstances, exceptions, standards
              and conditions under which the keeping of livestock within such a
              distance of landward side of watercourse boundary or a wetland
              boundary may be carried on;
          (tt.1) respecting recyclable materials, including regulations
              (i) prescribing recyclable materials,
              (ii) establishing criteria for determining whether a material is a
              recyclable material,
              (iii) creating different classes of recyclable materials for different
              purposes,
              (iv) prohibiting or restricting the acceptance, collection, storage,
              handling, transportation, processing or disposal of recyclable
              material or classes of recyclable materials,
              (v) requiring that a recyclable material or any other material or
              product be recycled or reused, and
              (vi) prohibiting or restricting the disposal of a recyclable material
              in a landfill, composting facility, incinerator, recycling facility or
              other site;
          (tt.2) respecting designated materials, including regulations
              (i) prescribing designated materials,
              (ii) establishing criteria for determining whether a material is a
              designated material,
              (iii) creating different classes of designated materials for
              different purposes,
              (iv) prohibiting or restricting the manufacture, acceptance,
              collection, sale, supply, offering for sale or supply, packaging,
              labelling, storage, handling, distribution, transportation,
              processing, disposal, recycling, recovery and reuse of designated
              materials,
              (v) requiring that a designated material be recycled or reused, and
              (vi) prohibiting or restricting the disposal of a designated
              material in a landfill, composting facility, incinerator, recycling
              facility or other site;
          (tt.3) respecting material stewardship programs for designated
          materials, including regulations
              (i) requiring the development and implementation of material
              stewardship programs for the management, collection, sale,
              supply, offering for sale or supply, packaging, labelling, storage,
              handling, distribution, transportation, processing, disposal, waste
              minimization, recycling, recovery, reuse and reduction in use of
              designated materials by manufacturers, distributors, retailers or
              any other person,




                                           32
                     Environmental Protection Act                Cap. E-9   33



    (ii) requiring that a material stewardship program be approved by
    the Minister, subject to the terms and conditions that the Minister
    considers appropriate,
    (iii) establishing standards for material stewardship programs,
    (iv) requiring participation in a material stewardship program and
    providing for the exemption of persons from a requirement to
    participate in a material stewardship program,
    (v) authorizing a person to designate a third party to operate a
    material stewardship program on the person’s behalf,
    (vi) respecting the keeping and inspection of records in respect of
    a material stewardship program,
    (vii) requiring the reporting of information in respect of a
    material stewardship program to the Minister,
    (viii) requiring the provision and posting of public and
    educational information and material respecting material
    stewardship programs, and
    (ix) requiring a person to provide security to ensure the person’s
    compliance with the terms of a material stewardship program and
    respecting the form, amount and content of the security;
(tt.4) respecting recycling facilities, including regulations
    (i) prohibiting the operation of a recycling facility unless
    authorized by a permit issued under the regulations,
    (ii) establishing standards for the operation, construction and
    design of recycling facilities, and
    (iii) prohibiting or restricting the acceptance, collection, storage,
    handling, processing or disposal of any designated material at a
    recycling facility unless authorized by an endorsement in respect
    of the designated material on a recycling facility permit;
(tt.5) providing for any transitional matters or issues for the
effective implementation of clauses (tt.1) to (tt.4) as the Lieutenant
Governor in Council considers necessary or advisable;
(uu) respecting the entry upon private property and inspection of
any premises, other than a dwelling-place, by an environment
officer, conservation officer or inspector for the purpose of ensuring
compliance with this Act and the regulations;
(vv) respecting the conducting of tests, and the taking of samples,
photographs and measurements of water or other liquid, soil,
vegetation or other thing or matter by an environment officer,
conservation officer or inspector for the purpose of ensuring
compliance with this Act and the regulations;
(ww) requiring any person to produce for inspection, on the request
of an environment officer, conservation officer or inspector, any
records or other documents concerning matters relevant to ensuring
compliance with this Act and the regulations;


                                 33
34   Cap. E-9                  Environmental Protection Act



          (xx) requiring any person to produce for inspection, on the request
          of an environment officer, conservation officer or inspector, any
          certificate, license, permit, variance, exemption, management plan or
          other authorization required to carry on any activity or undertaking
          under this Act or the regulations;
          (yy) respecting the stopping of motor vehicles by an environment
          officer or conservation officer for the purposes of enforcing this Act
          and the regulations;
          (zz) providing that compliance by a person with the provisions of
          and standards set out in this Act and the regulations, and with the
          terms and conditions of licenses, permits, endorsements on permits,
          certificates, management plans, material stewardship plans,
          exemptions, variances and other authorizations issued under this Act
          and the regulations, does not preclude the issuance to the person of
          an environmental protection order under section 7 or 7.1 of this Act
          or the issuance to the person of an emergency field order referred to
          in clause (aaa), where the Minister or an environment officer
          believes, on reasonable and probable grounds, that an activity or
          undertaking carried on by that person is a threat to the environment
          or environmental health;
          (aaa) respecting the issuance of verbal and written emergency field
          orders by an environment officer to any person who is or was
          carrying on an activity which is a violation of the regulations, or
          who is the registered owner of the property on which that activity or
          undertaking is or was carried on, or to any other person specified in
          the regulations, requiring that person to cease the activity and to take
          such remedial action as is specified in the order;
          (bbb) requiring any person to whom a verbal or written emergency
          field order referred to in clause (aaa) is issued by an environment
          officer to comply with the order;
          (ccc) respecting the delegation by the Minister of any function
          conferred on the Minister by a regulation to another Minister or to a
          director or other employee of the Department;
          (ddd) deeming any person to whom a license, permit, endorsement
          on a permit, certificate, exemption, variance or other authorization is
          issued, or for whom a management plan or a material stewardship
          plan is approved, to have accepted responsibility for all work done
          pursuant thereto;
          (eee) exempting the Minister, and any employee or officer of the
          Crown from liability for any loss or damage caused by
             (i) any activity or undertaking or other thing done under a
             license, permit, endorsement on a permit, exemption,
             management plan, material stewardship plan or other
             authorization issued under this Act or the regulations,


                                           34
                    Environmental Protection Act               Cap. E-9   35



    (ii) the revocation of any such license, permit, endorsement on a
    permit, exemption, management plan, material stewardship plan
    or other authorization, or
    (iii) the amendment of any terms and conditions of any such
    license, permit, endorsement on a permit, exemption,
    management plan, material stewardship plan or other
    authorization;
(fff) providing that no action or other proceeding for damages lies
or shall be instituted against
    (i) the Minister,
    (ii) any person to whom the Minister has delegated one or more
    of his or her functions under this Act or the regulations,
    (iii) any environment officer, conservation officer or inspector or
    any other person acting under the authority of this Act or the
    regulations, or
    (iv) any other person lawfully assisting or acting under the
    direction of any person referred to in subclauses (i) to (iii),
for anything done or not done, in good faith in the performance or
intended performance of any duty or exercise or intended exercise of
any power under this Act or the regulations;
(ggg) prohibiting the giving of false or misleading information in
any application, report or statement or any other document submitted
or made to the Minister, an inspector, an environment officer, a
conservation officer, management specialist or other employee of
the Department, under this Act or the regulations;
(hhh) respecting the grounds for refusing a license, permit,
endorsement on a permit, variance, certificate, exemption,
management plan, material stewardship plan or other authorization
that is the subject of an application, or that has been issued or
approved, under this Act or the regulations;
(iii) requiring any person to whom an environment officer or an
inspector makes a request for assistance or information to provide all
reasonable assistance and all information reasonably necessary to
enable the environment officer or inspector to carry out his or her
functions under this Act and the regulations;
(jjj) prohibiting the obstruction of, or knowingly making of false or
misleading statements to, an environment officer or an inspector
engaged in carrying out his or her functions under this Act or the
regulations;
(kkk) prohibiting any person from violating or contravening any
provision of the regulations or any term of condition of any license,
permit, endorsement on a permit, variance, certificate, exemption,
management plan, material stewardship plan or other authorization
issued under this Act or the regulations;


                                35
36   Cap. E-9                  Environmental Protection Act



          (lll) respecting the burden of proof on a defendant, in any
          prosecution of an offence under this Act or the regulations, upon the
          prosecution establishing a prima facie case, or upon a defendant,
              (i) to prove due diligence, or
              (ii) to prove that any exception, exemption, proviso, excuse or
              qualification provided for or recognized in this Act or the
              regulations operates in favour of the defendant;
          (mmm) establishing factors which may be taken into account, in any
          prosecution of an offence under this Act or the regulations, to
          determine whether a defendant exercised due diligence;
          (nnn) deeming, for the purposes of a prosecution of an offence
          under this Act or the regulations, the registered owner of the
          property on which any activity or undertaking is or was carried on in
          contravention of this Act or the regulations to have caused or
          permitted the activity or undertaking unless the registered owner
          establishes, on the balance of probabilities, that the registered owner
          did not do so, and respecting the onus or burden of proof of the
          registered owner to do so;
          (ooo) deeming, for the purposes of a prosecution of an offence
          under this Act or the regulations, the identification in the Prince
          Edward Island Wetland Inventory of any area of the province as
          open water, deep marsh, shallow marsh, brackish marsh or salt
          marsh to be prima facie evidence that the area is such a type of
          wetland;
          (ppp) respecting the appeal of any order made under this Act or the
          regulations, or of any decision made under this Act or the
          regulations to refuse, revoke or amend a permit, endorsement on a
          permit, variance, exemption or other authorization or of any decision
          to refuse to approve a management plan or material stewardship plan
          or to revoke or amend a management plan or material stewardship
          plan including
              (i) providing for the appeal of such order or decision to the Island
              Regulatory and Appeals Commission,
              (ii) respecting the procedure for the appeal from such an order or
              decision, and
              (iii) providing that the order or decision continues in effect
              pending the determination of the appeal;
          (qqq) prescribing the fine or range of fines that a person is liable to,
          on summary conviction, where the person is found guilty of an
          offence for contravening a provision of this Act or the regulations;
          (rrr) establishing that any officer, director or agent of a corporation
          who directs, authorizes, assents to, acquiesces in, or participates in,
          the commission of an offence by the corporation is guilty of an
          offence;


                                           36
                        Environmental Protection Act             Cap. E-9                   37



    (sss) prescribing or specifying any thing or matter required or
    permitted by this Act to be, or referred to in this Act as being,
    prescribed or specified by the regulations, for which a specific
    power is not otherwise provided in this Act;
    (ttt) providing for the continuation or revocation of any permit or
    other authorization issued under sections 10 to 11.5 of this Act that
    is in force immediately prior to the repeal of those provisions;
    (uuu) providing for any transitional matters or issues arising out of
    the repeal of sections 10 to 11.5 of this Act as the Lieutenant
    Governor in Council considers necessary or advisable, including
    providing for, the expiry of existing permits issued under section 10
    of the Act;
    (vvv) respecting any other matters that the Lieutenant Governor in
    Council considers necessary or advisable to facilitate the
    implementation or administration of this Act.
  (2) A regulation made under subsection (1) may adopt by reference in      Adoption of codes
whole or in part, with such changes as the Minister considers necessary,
any code or standard, or any regulation made by any other government in
Canada or recognized technical organization, and may require
compliance with any code, standard or regulation so adopted. 1988,c.19,
s.25;1992,c.21,s.8;     2004,c.30,s.3;   2004,c.4,s.2;    2008,c.13,s.8;
2009,c.69,s.2.

                               GENERAL
26. No person shall knowingly give false information in any application,    False information
return, or statement made to the Minister, an environment officer, or any
employee of the Department, in respect of any matter under this Act or
the regulations. 1988,c.19,s.26.
27. (1) This Act and the regulations may be enforced by                     Enforcement
     (a) the Minister;
     (b) an environment officer;
     (c) repealed by 2008,c.13,s.9;
     (d) any officer or member of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police;
     (e) a conservation officer appointed under the Wildlife Conservation
     Act;
     (f) a fisheries officer designated under the Fisheries Act (Canada).
  (2) No person shall obstruct or attempt to obstruct any person lawfully   Obstruction
carrying out the enforcement of this Act or the regulations.
1991,c.10,s.9; 2008,c.13,s.9.
28. The Minister may, as the Minister considers necessary, revoke,          Revocation, terms
impose terms and conditions on, or alter any terms and conditions of, any   and conditions



                                    37
38                    Cap. E-9                 Environmental Protection Act



                      authorization issued under this Act or the regulations, including the
                      following:
                           (a) an order, including an environmental protection order;
                           (b) a license;
                           (c) a certificate;
                           (d) an approval;
                           (e) a permit or an endorsement on a permit;
                           (f) a variance;
                           (g) a management plan;
                           (h) a material stewardship plan;
                           (i) an exemption;
                           (j) a permission. 2002,c.5,s.11; 2006,c.5,s.4; 2008,c.13,s.10;
                           2009,c.69,s.3.
Orders - service      29. (1) No person to whom an order, including an environmental
                      protection order, is directed pursuant to this Act or the regulations is
                      required to comply with the order until the order has been served on the
                      person.
When order              (2) Any order issued pursuant to this Act or the regulations is deemed
sufficiently served   to be sufficiently served
                           (a) upon a copy being personally served on the person to whom it is
                           directed;
                           (b) upon a copy being sent by facsimile or by other electronic
                           means to the person to whom it is directed and an acknowledgement
                           of receipt being received;
                           (c) five days after a copy is sent by mail addressed to the person to
                           whom it is directed at the last known address for that person; or
                           (d) in the case of a registered owner of real property, five days after
                           a copy is sent by mail to the address for the registered owner shown
                           on the last revised assessment roll.
Service of director     (3) Where the person to be served is a corporation, service on a
or officer of         director, officer or recognized agent of the corporation in accordance
corporation
                      with subsection (2) is deemed to be service on the corporation for the
                      purposes of this Act.
Order for               (4) Where it is impractical for any reason to serve an order in a
substituted service   manner referred to prescribed in subsection (2), an ex parte application
                      may be made to a judge of the Supreme Court who may make an order
                      for substituted service providing for such steps to be taken to bring the
                      matter to the attention of the person to be served.
Evidence                (5) Any order issued pursuant to this Act or the regulations shall be
                      prima facie proof in proceedings in any court not only that the order was
                      legally made, but also that every administrative prerequisite necessary to

                                                           38
                         Environmental Protection Act              Cap. E-9                    39



enable the making of the order was done and satisfied, and no further
proof than the mere production of the original order or a copy thereof
certified by the Minister or his authorized representative, is necessary.
1988,c.19,s.29; 2005,c.32,s.4; 2008,c.13,s.11.
29.1 (1) In this section, “Commission” means the Island Regulatory and        Island Regulatory
Appeals Commission established under section 2 of the Island                  and Appeals
                                                                              Commission
Regulatory and Appeals Commission Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap. I-11.
  (2) A person to whom an environmental protection order is issued by         Right of appeal to
the Minister or an environment officer under subsection 7(2) or 7.1(2)        Commission

may, within 21 days from the date the environmental protection order is
served on the person, appeal the environmental protection order by
serving a notice of appeal on the Commission.
  (3) A person to whom an order is issued by the Minister or an               Idem
environment officer under the regulations may, within 21 days from the
date the order is served on the person, appeal the order by serving a
notice of appeal on the Commission, if the regulations indicate that the
order may be appealed to the Commission in accordance with this
section.
  (4) A person who is aggrieved by a decision of the Minister or of any       Idem
officer or employee of the Department
     (a) to refuse that person a permit, endorsement on a permit,
     variance, exemption or other authorization that may be issued under
     this Act or the regulations;
     (b) to revoke or amend a permit, endorsement on a permit, variance,
     exemption or other authorization held by that person under this Act
     or the regulations; or
     (c) to refuse to approve a management plan or a material
     stewardship plan proposed by that person under the regulations, or
     to revoke or amend a management plan or a material stewardship
     plan of that person after it was approved,
may, within 21 days from the date the decision is served on the person,
appeal the decision by serving a notice of appeal on the Commission, if
the regulations indicate that the decision may be appealed to the
Commission in accordance with this section.
  (5) A notice of appeal served on the Commission under this section          Notice
shall be in writing, on a form approved by the Commission, and shall
state the grounds for the appeal, the relief sought, and the name and
address of the person making the appeal.
  (6) The service of a written notice of appeal under this section does not   Idem
operate as a stay of, and shall not in any way affect the environmental


                                     39
40                      Cap. E-9                 Environmental Protection Act



                        protection order or order referred to in subsection (3) or a decision
                        referred to in subsection (4), as the case may be, that is the subject matter
                        of the appeal.
Notice of hearing         (7) In any appeal under this section, the Commission shall serve notice
                        upon the person making the appeal and the Minister of the date, time and
                        place at which the appeal will be heard.
Idem                      (8) Where a notice is served by the Commission under subsection (7),
                        the notice may be served personally, or
                             (a) where the notice is served on the Minister, by mailing the notice
                             to the business address of the Minister; or
                             (b) where the notice is served on a person making the appeal, by
                             mailing the notice to the address on the person’s notice of appeal.
Deemed service             (9) Where service referred to in subsection (8) is made by mail, the
                        service shall be deemed to be made on the fifth day after the date of
                        mailing, unless the person on whom service is being made establishes
                        that the person, acting in good faith, through the absence, accident,
                        illness or other cause beyond the person’s control, did not receive the
                        notice until a later date.
Procedure                 (10) The Commission shall, when hearing an appeal, determine its own
                        procedure, subject to adherence to the rules of natural justice.
Order                     (11) The Commission shall hear and decide an appeal and shall issue
                        an order giving effect to its disposition.
Idem                      (12) The Commission may vary, confirm or rescind the order or
                        decision being appealed.
Reasons for
decision                  (13) The Commission shall give written reasons for its decision and
                        shall provide a certified copy of its decision or order to the person
                        making the appeal and to the Minister. 2008,c.13,s.12; 2009,c.69,s.4.
Liability of officers   30. The Minister, environment officers, or any other persons acting
                        under the authority of this Act or the regulations are not personally liable
                        for any loss or damage suffered by any person by reason of anything in
                        good faith done or omitted to be done in the purported exercise of any
                        powers given by this Act or the regulations. 1988,c.19,s.30.
Injunction              31. (1) In addition to any other remedy provided by law, any
                        contravention or violation of this Act or the regulations may be
                        restrained by injunction at the instance of the Minister upon application
                        to the Supreme Court, and the court shall grant the injunction upon being
                        satisfied that the granting of the injunction is advisable to ensure
                        compliance with this Act or the regulations.


                                                             40
                         Environmental Protection Act               Cap. E-9                       41



  (2) An injunction granted pursuant to subsection (1) may be
                                                                               Form
prohibitive or mandatory in nature, and where mandatory, may require
the taking of action to clean or restore the environment. 1988, c.19, s.31.
32. (1) Any natural person who contravenes or violates                         Penalty
     (a) any provision of this Act or the regulations; or
     (b) any term, condition or provision of any order, including an
     environmental protection order, license, certificate, approval, permit,
     endorsement on a permit, permission or other authorization issued
     under this Act or the regulations,
is guilty of an offence and if no penalty is otherwise specifically
provided in this Act or the regulations, is liable on summary conviction
to a fine of not less than $200 or more than $10,000, or to imprisonment
for 90 days, or to both, and to pay such restitution as the judge thinks fit
to any person aggrieved or affected by the contravention or violation.
  (2) Repealed by 2008,c.13,s.13.                                              Idem

  (3) Any corporation which contravenes or violates                            Idem
     (a) any provision of this Act or the regulations; or
     (b) any term, condition or provision of any order, including an
     environmental protection order, license, certificate, approval, permit,
     endorsement on a permit, permission or other authorization issued
     under this Act or the regulations,
is guilty of an offence and if no penalty is otherwise specifically
provided in this Act or the regulations, is liable on summary conviction
to a fine of not less than $1,000 or more than $50,000, or its directors to
imprisonment for 90 days, or to both, and to pay such restitution as the
judge thinks fit to any person aggrieved or affected by the contravention
or violation.
  (4) Repealed by 2008,c.13,s.13.                                              Idem

  (5) Any officer, director or agent of a corporation who directs,             Personal liability of
authorizes, assents to, acquiesces in, or participates in, the commission of   corporate officers

an offence by that corporation under subsection (3) is guilty of an
offence and is liable, in respect of the commission of an offence by the
corporation under subsection (3), to any penalty set out in subsection (1).
  (6) Where a contravention or violation of any provision of the Act or        Continuing offence
the regulations continues for more than one day, the offender is guilty of
a separate offence for each day that the contravention or violation
continues.
  (7) Proceedings with respect to an offence under this Act or the             Limitation period
regulations may be instituted at any time within two years after the time
when the subject matter of the proceedings arose.

                                     41
42                    Cap. E-9                Environmental Protection Act



                        (8) For the purposes of subsection (3), Her Majesty in right of the
Prosecution of
Crown
                      province or in right of Canada is deemed to be a corporation.
                      1991,c.10,s.10;    1994,c.16,s.1;    2002,c.5,s.12;   2008,c.13,s.13,
                      2009,c.69,s.5.
Remedial action       33. (1) Where
authorized by court       (a) pursuant to this Act or the regulations,
                             (i) the Minister or an environment officer has issued an order,
                             including an environmental protection order, or
                             (ii) the Minister has given a direction; and
                          (b) the person to whom the order is issued, or the direction is given,
                          has failed to comply with it,
                      the Minister may apply to the Supreme Court for an order authorizing the
                      Minister to take such remedial action as may be specified in the order.
Order for costs of      (2) After taking remedial action under a court order pursuant to
remediation           subsection (1), the Minister may issue an order for the costs of the
                      remedial action against the person to whom the original order or
                      direction was given. 1995,c.11,s.5; 2005,c.32,s.5; 2008,c.13,s.14.
Immediate action      34. (1) Where
required, order or        (a) pursuant to this Act or the regulations,
direction
                             (i) the Minister or an environment officer has issued an order,
                             including an environmental protection order, or
                             (ii) the Minister has given a direction;
                          (b) the person to whom the order is issued, or the direction is given,
                          has failed to comply with it; and
                          (c) the order or direction relates to a matter which in the opinion of
                          the Minister requires immediate action to prevent further injury to
                          the environment,
                      the Minister may take the appropriate remedial action to carry out the
                      terms of the order or direction.
Order for costs         (2) After taking remedial action under subsection (1) the Minister may
                      issue an order for the costs of the remedial action against the person to
                      whom the original order or direction was given. 1995,c.11,s.5;
                      2005,c.32,s.6; 2008,c.13,s.15.
Immediate action      35. (1) Where contamination or damage of any kind is caused by failure
required, no order    of any person to comply with the provisions of this Act or regulations
or direction
                      and where the contamination or damage relates to a matter which in the
                      opinion of the Minister requires immediate action to prevent further
                      injury to the environment, the Minister may take the appropriate remedial
                      action to clean up the contamination or damage.




                                                          42
                        Environmental Protection Act              Cap. E-9                     43



   (2) After taking remedial action under subsection (1) the Minister may
                                                                             Order for costs
issue an order for the costs of the remedial action against the person who
has caused the contamination or damage. 1995,c.11,s.5.
36. An order for cost of remediation under subsection 33(2), 34(2) or        Filed order has
35(2) may be filed with the Registrar of the Court of Appeal and the         effect as judgment

Supreme Court at any time thirty days after it is issued and, when so
filed, the order is of the same force and effect as if it were a judgment.
1995,c.11,s.5; 2008,c.20,s.72(28).




                                    43
44   Cap. E-9   Environmental Protection Act



                     APPENDIX 2




                            44
