
     This consolidation is unofficial and is for reference only.  For the
     official version of the regulations, consult the original documents
     on file with the _R_e_g_i_s_t_r_y_ _o_f_ _R_e_g_u_l_a_t_i_o_n_s, or refer to the _R_o_y_a_l
     _G_a_z_e_t_t_e_ _P_a_r_t_ _I_I.
     Regulations are amended frequently.  Please check the list of
     _R_e_g_u_l_a_t_i_o_n_s_ _b_y_ _A_c_t to see if there are any recent amendments to these
     regulations filed with the Registry that are not yet included in this
     consolidation.
     Although every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy of this
     electronic version, the Registry of Regulations assumes no
     responsibility for any discrepancies that may have resulted from
     reformatting.
     This electronic version is copyright © 2009, _P_r_o_v_i_n_c_e_ _o_f_ _N_o_v_a_ _S_c_o_t_i_a,
     all rights reserved.  It is for your personal use and may not be
     copied for the purposes of resale in this or any other form.


      _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 
     |_AA_pp_pp_rr_oo_vv_aa_ll_ss_ _PP_rr_oo_cc_ee_dd_uu_rr_ee_ _RR_ee_gg_uu_ll_aa_tt_ii_oo_nn_ss|

                         mmaaddee uunnddeerr SSeeccttiioonn 6666 ooff tthhee
                               EEnnvviirroonnmmeenntt AAcctt
                             SS..NN..SS.. 11999944--9955,, cc.. 11
           OOrrddeerr iinn CCoouunncciill 9955--228877 ((AApprriill 1111,, 11999955)),, NN..SS.. RReegg.. 4488//9955
     CCiittaattiioonn
     11These regulations may be cited as the "Approvals Procedure
     Regulations".
     DDeeffiinniittiioonnss
     22In these regulations
     ((aa))"Act" means the Environment Act;
     ((bb))"activity" means an activity listed in the Activities Designation
     Regulations;
     ((cc))"Administrator", in respect of an application, means a person who
     has been designated by the Minister as the person responsible for the
     activity to which the application relates, and includes an acting
     Administrator;
     ((dd))"application" means an application
     (i) for an approval,
     (ii) to change the activity that is the subject of an approval,
     (iii) to amend a term or condition of, add a term or condition to or
     delete a term or condition from an approval,
     (iv) to renew an approval;
     ((ee))"completed application" means an application, including additional
     information submitted under subsection 53(2) of the Act, which
     enables the Minister or an Administrator to commence a detailed
     review of the application;
     ((ff))"confidential business information" includes a trade secret and
     know-how, but does not include information about the environmental
     effects or associated mitigation measures of a proposed activity;
     ((gg))"Department" means the Department of Environment and Labour;
     ((hh))"Minister" means the Minister of Environment and Labour;
     ((ii))"site" means the lands where an activity or proposed activity will
     take place identified in the manner described in clause 5(1)(e);
     ((jj))"trade secret" means information, including a formula, pattern,
     compilation, program, device, product, method, technique or process,
     that
     (i) is used, or may be used, in business or for any commercial
     advantage,
     (ii) derives independent economic value, actual or potential, from
     not being generally known to the public or to other persons who can
     obtain economic value from its disclosure or use,
     (iii) is the subject of reasonable efforts to prevent it from
     becoming generally known, and
     (iv) the disclosure of which would result in harm or improper
     benefit.
     AApppplliiccaattiioonn ffoorrmm
     33 ((11))An application for an approval shall be made on a form
     prescribed by the Minister.
     ((22))The application shall be made and signed by
     ((aa))a person who is an authorized signatory of the applicant, in the
     case of an application referred to in subclause 2(d)(i);
     ((bb))the approval holder, in the case of an application referred to in
     subclauses 2(d)(ii), (iii) or (iv); or
     ((cc))by an agent of persons identified in clauses (a) or (b) who
     produces proof of authorization to make the application.
     CCoonnffiiddeennttiiaall bbuussiinneessss iinnffoorrmmaattiioonn
     44 ((11))This Section is subject to the Freedom of Information and
     Protection of Privacy Act and regulations made thereto.
     ((22))Subject to subsection (1), all information which is filed with the
     Department, including information filed under Part V of the Act,
     shall be public information.
     ((33))Information which the applicant claims to be protected under the
     Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act, including
     confidential business information, shall be clearly identified to an
     Administrator.
     ((44))Where an applicant claims information to be confidential business
     information, an Administrator shall review the claim and, until a
     decision is made pursuant to subsection (6), shall take adequate
     precautions to prevent disclosure of the information.
     ((55))When reviewing a claim pursuant to subsection (4), an
     Administrator may request additional information to support the
     claim, including what steps the applicant has taken to maintain the
     confidentiality of the information.
     ((66))Within 14 days following the date of receipt of the claim filed
     pursuant to subsection (4) or within such further time as may be
     agreed upon by the applicant and the Administrator, an Administrator
     shall advise the applicant in writing whether the claim is accepted
     or rejected in whole or in part.
     ((77))An appeal from a decision under subsection (6) shall be to the
     Minister or a person designated by the Minister.
     ((88))Information accepted to be confidential business information
     pursuant to subsection (6) shall not be disclosed to the public and
     an Administrator shall take adequate precautions to prevent the
     disclosure of the information.
     ((99))Where an Administrator rejects a claim under subsection (6), an
     applicant shall notify the Administrator in writing that
     ((aa))the claim is waived and the applicant wishes to continue to
     proceed with the application under the Act and regulations; or
     ((bb))the application is to be withdrawn, in which case an Administrator
     shall forthwith return to the applicant all of the information
     submitted with the application.
     AApppprroovvaall aapppplliiccaattiioonn iinnffoorrmmaattiioonn
     55 ((11))Unless specified otherwise in an application form or by the
     Minister or an Administrator under subsection (2), an application
     shall be accompanied by the following information:
     ((aa))the name, address, telephone and fax number of the applicant and,
     where applicable, proof of current registration with the Registrar of
     Joint Stock Companies;
     ((bb))the location, capacity and size of the activity to which the
     application relates;
     ((cc))the nature of the activity, the change to the activity or the
     amendment, addition or deletion, as the case may be;
     ((dd))proof that the applicant either owns the site or has a lease or
     other written agreement or option with the landowner or occupier to
     enable the applicant to conduct the activity on the site or has the
     legal right or ability to conduct the activity without the consent of
     the landowner or occupier;
     ((ee))a plan or sketch of the site, or, if the Minister or an
     Administrator deems necessary, a survey plan prepared by a licensed
     Nova Scotia land surveyor;
     ((ff))if requested by the Minister or an Administrator, any municipal
     approval, permit or other authorization required pursuant to
     subsection 53(4) of the Act;
     ((gg))detailed plans and specifications which, if required by the
     Minister or an Administrator, are stamped by a professional engineer
     licensed to practice in Nova Scotia;
     ((hh))detailed description of the activity to which the application
     relates;
     ((ii))details of site suitability and sensitivity, including proximity
     to watercourses, residences and institutions, geology and
     hydrogeology;
     ((jj))copies of existing approvals that have been issued to the
     applicant relating to the activity under this Act or a predecessor to
     this Act;
     ((kk))copies of any environmental assessment study reports which may
     pertain to the activity;
     ((ll))the proposed or actual dates of construction commencement,
     construction completion, commencement of operation and project
     completion;
     ((mm))a description of any substances, their environmental impact, the
     sources of the substances and the amount of each substance that will
     or might be released into the environment as a result of the
     activity, the method by which the substances will be released and the
     steps to be taken to reduce the amount of the substances released or
     to mitigate their impacts;
     ((nn))a summary of required environmental monitoring information
     gathered during any previous approval period which has not already
     been submitted to the Department;
     ((oo))a summary of the performance of substance release control systems
     used for the activity, including performance during any previous
     approval period which has not already been submitted to the
     Department;
     ((pp))an explanation for the release of substances into the environment
     as a result of the activity;
     ((qq))proof that financial or other security, if required, will be
     provided;
     ((rr))a description of any adverse effect, including surface
     disturbance, that may or will result from the activity and how it
     will be controlled;
     ((ss))contingency plans to deal with any reasonably foreseeable sudden
     or gradual release of a substance which is likely to have a
     significant adverse effect;
     ((tt))a preliminary abandonment or rehabilitation plan, and, if
     required, a final abandonment or rehabilitation plan;
     ((uu))a description of any public consultation undertaken or proposed by
     the applicant;
     ((vv))information required to be submitted as part of or in support of
     the application pursuant to any other regulation made under the Act;
     and
     ((ww))any other information prescribed by the Minister in a directive,
     standard, policy, or guideline.
     ((22))The Minister or an Administrator may waive in writing any of the
     requirements of subsection (1) if the Minister or the Administrator
     is satisfied that a requirement is not relevant to a particular
     application or that the application is an application for a renewal.
     CCoommpplleetteedd aapppplliiccaattiioonn
     66 ((11))Where the application is not complete, the Minister or an
     Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing within 14 days of
     receipt of the application and request the information necessary to
     make the application complete.
     ((22))An appeal shall be to the Minister on a decision whether an
     application is complete.
     ((33))Where the information is not supplied by the applicant within 3
     months of a request under subsection (1), an Administrator may reject
     the application and shall immediately advise the applicant in writing
     that the application has been rejected.
     ((44))An applicant may request from an Administrator an extension of the
     3-month time limit prescribed in subsection (3).
     ((55))When the application is considered by the Minister or an
     Administrator to be a completed application, the Minister or an
     Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing and advise when a
     decision will be made as provided in subsection 54(2) of the Act.
     RReevviieeww ooff aapppplliiccaattiioonn
     77 ((11))During the review of an application, an Administrator may
     request oral information or additional written information from
     ((aa))an applicant or an agent of the applicant;
     ((bb))a person who is directly affected by the application;
     ((cc))a local authority, the Government, a Government agency or the
     Government of Canada or any agency or department of [the] Government
     of Canada; and
     ((dd))any other source that an Administrator considers appropriate.
     ((22))An applicant shall be given an opportunity to respond to
     information received under clauses 1(b), (c) or (d).
     ((33))Before approving an application, the Minister or an Administrator
     may require that the applicant provide a consultative process in the
     area where the activity or the proposed activity is or will be
     located.
     ((44))Subsection (3) does not apply where an application has been
     processed under Part IV of the Act.
     PPuurrppoossee aanndd ssccooppee ooff rreevviieeww
     88 ((11))The review of an application shall determine whether the impact
     on the environment of the activity conforms with regulations made
     pursuant to the Act, or with policies, standards or guidelines
     prescribed or adopted by the Minister.
     ((22))A review may include, but is not limited to, the following
     matters:
     ((aa))proposed methods of reducing the generation, use and release of
     substances;
     ((bb))available alternative technologies;
     ((cc))design plans and specifications for the activity;
     ((dd))site suitability, including soils, air and water quality,
     groundwater conditions, site drainage, water supply quantity and
     wastewater disposal alternatives;
     ((ee))the proposed monitoring programs to measure emissions and their
     effect on the environment;
     ((ff))proposed methods of management of the storage, treatment and
     disposal of substances;
     ((gg))proposed plans to complete the rehabilitation required in
     connection with the activity and available information about the
     success or failure of similar plans elsewhere;
     ((hh))the past performance of the applicant to provide for environmental
     protection with respect to the activity.
     IIssssuuaannccee ooff aapppprroovvaall
     99 ((11))The Minister or an Administrator may issue an approval pursuant
     to these regulations upon the payment of an administrative fee and a
     user fee which are approved by the Minister.
     ((22))Where there is a change in the name of the holder of an approval
     issued pursuant to these regulations, the holder of the approval
     shall advise the Minister or an Administrator in writing within 30
     days of the change.
     ((33))If the Minister or an Administrator refuses to issue an approval,
     an Administrator shall advise the applicant in writing of the
     decision and inform the applicant about what appeal processes are
     available.
     SSaammpplliinngg
     1100The costs of any sampling, analysis or other service required in an
     approval shall be paid by the approval holder.
     DDuurraattiioonn ooff aapppprroovvaall//rreenneewwaall
     1111 ((11))Unless provided otherwise in the Act or regulations and subject
     to subsection (2), where the Minister or an Administrator issues an
     approval, the Minister or the Administrator shall provide as a term
     and condition that the duration of the approval shall not exceed 10
     years.
     ((22))The applicant may request an approval for a shorter duration than
     the 10 years prescribed in subsection (1).
     ((33))An approval may be renewed by the Minister or an Administrator
     with or without changes upon the payment of an administrative fee and
     a user fee which are approved by the Minister.
     TTrraannssffeerrss
     1122 ((11))The sale of a controlling interest of a business or a transfer
     of an approval from a parent company to a subsidiary or an affiliate
     is deemed to be a transfer requiring consent under subsection 59(1)
     of the Act.
     ((22))Where financial or other security is required in respect of an
     activity, the Minister or an Administrator shall not approve a
     transfer, sale, lease, assignment or other disposition of the
     approval until the Minister or an Administrator is satisfied that
     financial or other security has been provided by the new owner or
     operator.
     SSeeccuurriittyy
     1133 ((11))Where financial or other security is required by the Minister
     under Section 57 of the Act, the requirements shall be established by
     regulations made under the Act or by policies or guidelines
     established by the Minister under subsection 8(2) of the Act.
     ((22))Where financial or other security is required under the Act or by
     the regulations, the Minister or an Administrator shall not issue an
     approval until the Minister or the Administrator is satisfied that
     good and valuable security has been provided.
     ((33))The approval holder shall ensure that any security provided is
     kept valid
     ((aa))for the term of the approval;
     ((bb))for the term provided in subsection 21(4) where a site is to be
     abandoned; or
     ((cc))for such other term as provided in a regulation made under the Act
     or prescribed by the Minister or an Administrator.
     ((44))If the security required under subsection (1) is provided on an
     annual basis, the approval holder shall no later than 60 days prior
     to the expiry of the security present evidence to the Minister or an
     Administrator that the security has been renewed.
     AAmmoouunntt ooff sseeccuurriittyy
     1144 ((11))If required, financial or other security shall be in an amount
     determined by the Minister or an Administrator to be sufficient to
     ensure completion of rehabilitation of a site based on
     ((aa))the estimated costs of rehabilitation submitted by the approval
     holder;
     ((bb))the nature, complexity and extent of the activity;
     ((cc))the probable difficulty of rehabilitation, considering factors
     such as topography, soils, geology, hydrology and revegetation; and
     ((dd))any other factors [that] the Minister or an Administrator
     considers to be relevant.
     ((22))The approval holder shall prepare and provide detailed information
     in support of the estimated cost of rehabilitation.
     AAppppoorrttiioonnmmeenntt ooff sseeccuurriittyy
     1155The Minister or an Administrator may designate portions of a site
     on which the activity is or will be taking place and determine the
     amount of security to be provided by the approval holder for each
     portion so designated.
     AAddjjuussttmmeenntt ooff sseeccuurriittyy
     1166 ((11))The Minister or an Administrator may periodically review and
     either increase or decrease the amount of security required by the
     Minister or by the regulations where
     ((aa))the estimated cost of future rehabilitation changes;
     ((bb))the activity on the site is increased or reduced;
     ((cc))the site or any portion of it is rehabilitated;
     ((dd))the rehabilitation plan in an approval is changed;
     ((ee))the approval holder is conducting on the site more than one
     activity for which security is required; or
     ((ff))any other circumstances exist that may increase or decrease the
     estimated cost of rehabilitation.
     ((22))To complete a review under subsection (1), the Minister or an
     Administrator may require the approval holder to supply updated
     engineering drawings which show such matters as the extent of
     progressive rehabilitation and the areas of disturbance.
     ((33))The Minister or an Administrator may specify times or prescribe a
     schedule for re-evaluating and adjusting security provided by an
     approval holder.
     ((44))The Minister or an Administrator shall, within 7 days of a
     decision made under subsection (1), notify the approval holder in
     writing of any proposed adjustment to the amount of the security and,
     where the amount of the security required has been increased, the
     approval holder shall immediately post any additional security with
     the Department.
     FFoorrmm ooff sseeccuurriittyy
     1177 ((11))Security may be in one or more of the following forms:
     ((aa))cash;
     ((bb))cheques and other similar negotiable instruments made payable to
     the Nova Scotia Department of Finance;
     ((cc))Government guaranteed bonds, debentures, term deposits,
     certificates of deposit, trust certificates or investment
     certificates assigned to the Nova Scotia Department of Finance;
     ((dd))irrevocable letters of credit, irrevocable letters of guarantee,
     performance bonds or surety bonds in a form acceptable to the
     Minister or an Administrator; or
     ((ee))any other form of security which provides good and valuable
     consideration and that is approved in writing by the Minister or an
     Administrator.
     ((22))Any interest which may accrue on any security deposited with the
     Department shall be paid to the approval holder.
     RReettuurrnn ooff sseeccuurriittyy
     1188 ((11))Subject to subsection 21(4), where the Minister or an
     Administrator certifies that rehabilitation has been performed
     satisfactorily on all or part of the site, the Minister or an
     Administrator may return or direct the return of all or part of the
     security provided.
     ((22))If the rehabilitation of the site has been partially completed,
     the Minister or an Administrator may, on application by the approval
     holder, return or direct the return of a part of the security in an
     amount determined by the Minister or the Administrator.
     ((33))Where the Minister or an Administrator decreases the amount of
     security under Section 16, the Minister or the Administrator shall
     within 7 days of the decision return or direct the return of part of
     the security provided together with any interest that may have
     accrued on the security.
     ((44))Where an application for an approval is submitted but no approval
     is issued, the Minister or an Administrator shall within 7 days of
     the decision return or direct the return of any security deposited
     with the Department.
     ((55))Upon the sale, transfer or other disposition of a site covered by
     security and upon consent being granted under Section 59 of the Act,
     the Minister or an Administrator shall, upon application by the
     approval holder, return the security to the approval holder if an
     approval is granted to the new owner or operator and security
     approved by the Minister or an Administrator is provided by the new
     owner or operator.
     FFoorrffeeiittuurree ooff sseeccuurriittyy
     1199 ((11))Where
     ((aa))a person fails to comply with an approved abandonment plan, a
     rehabilitation plan or an order from the Minister or an Administrator
     regarding rehabilitation of the site and the failure to comply may,
     in the opinion of the Minister or the Administrator, prevent or
     otherwise interfere with rehabilitation of the site; or
     ((bb))security required by the Minister or by the regulations is not
     renewed at least 60 days before its expiry date and rehabilitation is
     not complete,
     the Minister or an Administrator may order that all or part of the
     security provided by the approval holder be forfeited.
     ((22))Where the Minister or an Administrator orders security to be
     forfeited under subsection (1), the Minister or an Administrator
     shall give written notice of the decision to the approval holder by
     fax or mail sent to the last known address of the approval holder.
     ((33))The Minister or an Administrator may spend as much of the security
     as is reasonably necessary to carry out the rehabilitation of the
     site and other lands on which the activity has an impact and keep
     records of any money spent.
     ((44))Where the amount of the forfeited security exceeds the amount
     required for rehabilitation, the Minister or an Administrator shall
     pay the excess amount to the approval holder.
     ((55))Where the amount of the forfeited security is insufficient to pay
     for the cost of rehabilitation, the approval holder remains liable
     for the balance of the cost.
     CCoommpplliiaannccee mmoonniittoorriinngg
     2200 ((11))Unless a waiver is provided in writing by the Minister or an
     Administrator, an approval holder responsible for an activity shall
     undertake compliance monitoring as prescribed in an approval, or as
     prescribed in the Act or regulations made pursuant to the Act.
     ((22))An approval holder shall submit the results of the compliance
     monitoring to the Department at any times specified by the Minister
     or an Administrator.
     ((33))A person responsible for compliance monitoring shall report a
     release of a substance into the environment which exceeds those
     authorized in the approval in such manner as prescribed either in the
     approval, or as directed in the Act or regulations made pursuant to
     the Act.
     ((44))The approval holder shall be responsible for the costs of any
     compliance monitoring required.
     AAbbaannddoonnmmeenntt
     2211 ((11))An approval holder may abandon all or part of a site covered by
     an approval by notifying the Minister or an Administrator in writing
     at least 60 days prior to the date of the proposed abandonment.
     ((22))Unless the Minister or an Administrator approves otherwise in
     writing, an abandonment pursuant to subsection (1) does not relieve
     the approval holder or other persons responsible of any obligation
     contained in the Act, regulations, an approval or an order, or
     otherwise directed by the Minister or an Administrator to be
     performed by the approval holder.
     ((33))Unless exempted in writing by the Minister or an Administrator, an
     approval holder shall comply with obligations identified in
     subsection (2) for a period of 2 years from the date of abandonment
     or for a such longer or shorter time period [as] specified in writing
     by the Minister or an Administrator.
     ((44))Unless exempted in writing by the Minister or an Administrator, an
     approval holder shall ensure any security provided in respect of the
     activity on the site is kept in effect for the time period provided
     in subsection (3).
     RReehhaabbiilliittaattiioonn
     2222 ((11))An approval holder shall, to the satisfaction of the Minister
     or an Administrator, perform rehabilitation on the site in accordance
     with the Act and regulations, as specified in an approval or in
     accordance with an approved rehabilitation plan.
     ((22))An approval holder shall, upon request by the Minister or an
     Administrator, submit a final rehabilitation plan to the Minister or
     the Administrator to replace any initial or conceptual rehabilitation
     plan which may have been submitted.
     ((33))A rehabilitation plan shall be submitted to the Minister or an
     Administrator for approval 60 days prior to abandonment unless a
     method of rehabilitation has been approved by a regulation,
     guideline, standard or policy prescribed or adopted by the Minister.
     ((44))The Minister or an Administrator shall notify the approval holder
     within 14 days of submission of the rehabilitation plan whether the
     plan is approved or not.
     ((55))The Minister or an Administrator may issue a rehabilitation
     certificate if the Minister or the Administrator is of the opinion
     that rehabilitation of the site has been satisfactorily completed.
     EEffffeeccttiivvee ddaattee
     2233These regulations shall come into force on, from and after April
     11, 1995.
     =====================================================================
