                             PLEASE NOTE
This document, prepared by the Legislative Counsel Office, is an office
consolidation of this regulation, current to February 1, 2004. It is intended for
information and reference purposes only.

This document is not the official version of these regulations. The regulations and
the amendments printed in the Royal Gazette should be consulted to determine the
authoritative text of these regulations.

For more information concerning the history of these regulations, please see the
Table of Regulations.

If you find any errors or omissions in this consolidation, please contact:

                             Legislative Counsel Office
                                Tel: (902) 368-4291
                            Email: legislation@gov.pe.ca
                          CHAPTER F-14

                   FOREST MANAGEMENT ACT

        FOREST RENEWAL PROGRAM REGULATIONS

Pursuant to section 25 of the Forest Management Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988,
Cap. F-14, Council made the following regulations:

1. In these regulations                                                   Definitions

    (a) “Act” means the Forest Management Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap.       Act
    F-14;
    (b) “cord” means 128 cubic feet stacked roundwood or 2.4 solid        cord
    cubic metres;
    (c) “Forestry and Land Resource Modelling Division” means the         Forestry and Land
    Forestry and Land Resource Modelling Division of the Department;      Resource Modelling
                                                                          Division
    (d) “forestry processing company” means an individual,                forestry processing
    organization, or corporation that, excluding chipped biomass fuels,   company

    processes standing softwood trees into forest products, ships
    softwood roundwood off Prince Edward Island or processes
    softwood roundwood into sawn lumber products;
    (e) “inspector” means an inspector appointed under the Roads Act      inspector
    R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap. R-15;
    (f) “Minister” means the Minister of Agriculture and Forestry;        Minister

    (g) “Schedule” means the Department’s Private Forest Land             Schedule
    Schedule of Rates and Standards in effect at the time of treatment;
    (h) “softwood” means any coniferous tree. (EC189/96; 327/03)          softwood

2. There is established the Forest Renewal Program which, for private     Forest Renewal
forest land, shall consist of the following potential treatments or       Program

applications:
    (a) tree seedling production for reforestation purposes;
    (b) forest regeneration through either planting or enhancement of
    natural regeneration, or a combination thereof;
    (c) site preparation for regeneration enhancement;
    (d) vegetative competition control through the use of herbicides,
    manual or mechanical methods;
    (e) application of silvicultural cutting techniques to control the
    density, tree form, and species composition or to enhance natural
    regeneration for desired species in forest stands;


                                   1
2                     Cap. F-14                   Forest Management Act            Updated 2003
                                           Forest Renewal Program Regulations


                           (f) integrated management advice on techniques which will provide
                           for forest regeneration and the improvement of tree growth and
                           access for the achievement of the forest management objectives
                           specified by the landowner;
                           (g) forestry technical advice relating to the timing of proposed
                           harvests or harvesting techniques. (EC189/96)
Application           3. (1) Subject to subsection (2), landowners may apply, on the approved
                      form, for assistance under the Forest Renewal Program.
Conditions              (2) In order to obtain assistance under the Forest Renewal program a
                      landowner must
                          (a) enter into a forest renewal agreement which shall specify the
                          terms and conditions of the Forest Renewal Program which are
                          applicable to that property;
                          (b) pay to the Provincial Treasurer such fee as may be set out in the
                          Schedule for each hectare of planting, interplanting, or enrichment
                          planting;
                          (c) where considered necessary by a forest service officer, provide
                          the first plantation maintenance;
                          (d) notify the Forestry and Land Resource Modelling Division by
                          the date and year specified in the Forest Renewal Agreement, that
                          the site is ready for tree planting in accordance with the Schedule.
                          (EC189/96; 327/03)
Obligations of        4. (1) In support of the Forest Renewal Program, forestry processing
forestry processing   companies shall
companies
                          (a) keep detailed and accurate records, in such manner as the
                          Minister may require, to document the amount of roundwood and
                          chips purchased from forest land in the province;
                          (b) keep detailed and accurate records, in such manner as the
                          Minister may require, to document the amount of roundwood and
                          chips acquired from their own lands or received in exchange for a
                          service;
                          (c) on a quarterly basis, pay to the Forestry and Land Resource
                          Modelling Division $2 per cord for each cord of roundwood
                          softwood or $1 per tonne for roundwood softwood or pulpwood
                          chips that the company purchased, acquired or exchanged from
                          woodlands in the province excluding only that wood which was
                          custom sawn for the personal use of the owner of the softwood logs,
                          and together with such payments file an accurate report in such
                          manner as the Minister may require; and
                          (d) upon demand during regular business hours, provide copies of
                          such records and supporting documents as requested by the Minister
                          to allow auditing of the amounts payable;



                                                           2
Updated 2003                 Forest Management Act                  Cap. F-14                    3
                      Forest Renewal Program Regulations


    (e) for any softwood roundwood or pulpwood chips being shipped
    from Prince Edward Island
       (i) have in his possession a valid, properly completed load ticket
       in the form approved by the Minister, and
       (ii) surrender such ticket to the inspector at the load scale at the
       ferry terminal or the bridge across Northumberland Strait for all
       such wood being moved by truck.
   (2) Notwithstanding subsection (1), a forestry processing company            Administration
may deduct from its quarterly payment, an administration fee of 7 cents         costs

per cord or 3.5 cents per tonne for each cord or tonne on which payment
is made. (EC189/96; 327/03)
5. A forestry processing company that                                           Offences and
    (a) fails to comply with clause 4(1)(a), (b), (d) or subclause (e)(ii) or   penalties

    interferes with a forest service officer or another officer appointed
    by the Minister in the lawful implementation of his duty is guilty of
    an offence and is liable on summary conviction to a fine of not less
    than $250 and not more than $5,000;
    (b) fails to pay in full the fees specified in clause 4(1)(c) within 30
    days of the end of any quarter shall in addition to the outstanding
    fee, pay to the Minister upon demand by an officer appointed by the
    Minister an amount equal to the greater of $250 or five per cent of
    the amount outstanding plus 2% compound interest per month;
    (c) fails to file a report as set out in clause 4(1)(c) is guilty of an
    offence and is liable to be audited by an officer appointed by the
    Minister, and the court, upon summary conviction, shall order that,
    in addition to a fine of not less than $1,000 and not more than
    $10,000, the forest processing company pay to the Minister the cost
    of the audit and the outstanding fees payable plus a penalty of 5% of
    the amount outstanding plus 2% compound interest per month and
    an order for payment under this clause may be filed with the
    Supreme Court and shall be deemed to be a judgment obtained in the
    Supreme Court for recovery of a debt in the amount specified in the
    order;
    (d) fails to produce a valid load ticket shall have the vehicle and
    wood’s exit from the province denied until such time as a valid load
    ticket is produced;
    (e) submits to an officer appointed by the Minister a form containing
    a false or untrue statement knowing it to be false or untrue shall
    have the vehicle and wood’s exit from the province denied until
    such time as a valid load ticket is produced and is guilty of an
    offence and is liable on summary conviction to a fine of not less than
    $250 and not more than $5,000. (EC189/96; 189/01)



                                      3
4                    Cap. F-14                    Forest Management Act             Updated 2003
                                           Forest Renewal Program Regulations


                     6. (1) A driver of a commercial motor vehicle transporting softwood
Vehicle weighing
                     roundwood or softwood chips that is required by the Roads Act to be
                     weighed on an approved weighing device who fails to produce a valid
                     load ticket to an officer at an approved weighing device immediately
                     prior to the vehicle leaving the province shall be issued a detention order
                     prohibiting the vehicle from leaving the province until a valid load ticket
                     is delivered to an officer at an approved weighing device.
Offence, penalty       (2) Any person who fails to comply with the requirements of
                     subsection (1) is guilty of an offence and is liable on summary
                     conviction to the penalty set out in clause 5(e). (EC189/96)
Powers               7. Any officer appointed by the Minister may
                         (a) from time to time and at such intervals as he may consider
                         reasonable, determine and assess and reassess the fees payable under
                         clause 4(1)(c) and thereupon the fees so assessed or reassessed
                         become due and payable by the forest processing company;
                         (b) require any person in charge of a vehicle transporting softwood
                         roundwood or softwood chips out of the province to permit an
                         officer or an inspector to take samples of the load if the load ticket
                         indicates the load is excluded products. (EC189/96; 189/01)
Confidentiality      8. Except for the purposes of administration, enforcement and release of
                     cumulative data that does not identify individual forest processing
                     companies, all information, and all statements and documents, made
                     under these regulations are confidential. (EC189/96)
Personal liability   9. Pursuant to this regulation, neither the Minister nor any official or
                     employee of the Forestry and Land Resource Modelling Division or any
                     inspector appointed under the Roads Act is personally liable for any
                     damages occasioned by the performance in good faith of his duty or by
                     carrying out of orders or instructions received from a superior.
                     (EC189/96; 327/03)
Effective date       10. Revoked by EC327/03.




                                                           4
