                         PLEASE NOTE
This document, prepared by the Legislative Counsel Office, is an office
consolidation of this Act, current to March 13, 2010. It is intended for
information and reference purposes only.

This document is not the official version of the Act. The Act and the
amendments as printed under the authority of the Queen’s Printer for the
province should be consulted to determine the authoritative statement of the
law.

For more information concerning the history of this Act, please see the
Table of Public Acts.

If you find any errors or omissions in this consolidation, please contact:

                         Legislative Counsel Office
                            Tel: (902) 368-4291
                        Email: legislation@gov.pe.ca
                            CHAPTER F-14

                  FOREST MANAGEMENT ACT


1. In this Act                                                               Definitions

    (a) “best end use” means the utilization of trees or the management      best end use
    of forest stands to favour the production of trees of sufficient
    dimensions and quality to produce either peeler logs for veneer or
    logs for saw timber or otherwise to procure the highest value to the
    province;
    (a.1) not proclaimed;                                                    certified
                                                                             representative
    (b) “Crown” means Her Majesty in the right of the Province of            Crown
    Prince Edward Island;
    (c) “Crown forest lands” means all or any part of the forest lands       Crown forest lands
    vested in the Crown through the Public Works Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988,
    Cap. P-34 or forest lands on which forest management rights have
    been transferred to a Government Department or Division by a
    Crown agency;
    (d) “Crown forest product sales permit” or “permit” where used in        Crown forest
    sections 11 and 12, means a permit authorizing a person to cut,          product sales permit

    harvest or remove timber or other forest products;
    (e) “Department” means the Department of Environment, Energy             Department
    and Forestry;
    (f) “District Manager” means a person employed by the Department         District Manager
    to fill the position so designated;
    (g) “forest fire” means a fire burning on forest land or threatening     forest fire
    forest land;
    (h) “forest land” means                                                  forest land
       (i) any land, excluding the cleared land immediately adjacent to
       an occupied building, on which living or dead trees are the tallest
       type of vegetation,
       (ii) any land on which tree seedlings exist or have been planted
       and are retained for the purposes of producing forest products, or
       (iii) any land which is being manipulated by tree harvesting, site
       preparation, tree planting, and or other techniques that promote
       the establishment of tree seedlings;
    (i) “forest management” means the manipulation of forest land at         forest management
    any stage of the life cycle of the trees occupying it in such a manner



                                    1
2                       Cap. F-14                    Forest Management Act



                             that the stand of trees on an area of forest land is replaced by a stand
                             of trees of equivalent or higher quality;
forest product               (j) “forest product” means a type of product harvested from a tree
                             and includes but is not limited to logs, pulp, fuelwood (either round
                             or chips), maple sap and its derivatives, Christmas trees, fence posts,
                             stakes, rails, and box wood;
forest protection            (j.1) not proclaimed;
officer
forest road                  (k) “forest road” means a road on Crown forest lands to the fullest
                             extent of the right-of-way of such road and includes the bridges
                             thereon but does not include a highway as defined in the Highway
                             Traffic Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap. H-5;
forest service               (l) “forest service officer” means
officer                         (i) a person employed as a forest technician or forester by the
                                Department, or
                                (ii) a conservation officer appointed under the Wildlife
                                Conservation Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap. W-4.1.


forested natural area        (m) “forested natural area” means an area of forest land selected
                             because it is representative of a rare or uncommon forest ecosystem
                             and which is designated as such by regulation;
harvest                      (m.1) not proclaimed;
integrated                   (n) “integrated management” with respect to a parcel of forest land,
management                   means the application of silvicultural techniques and forest access
                             construction techniques in a manner which
                                (i) ensures that the forest land on an individual property produces
                                forest products,
                                (ii) makes a positive contribution to the conservation of the soil,
                                water and wildlife resources both on that parcel and on adjacent
                                lands, and
                                (iii) meets other objectives set for the property that are consistent
                                with the provincial Forest Policy;
Minister                     (o) “Minister” means the Minister of Environment, Energy and
                             Forestry;
multiple use                 (p) “multiple use” with respect to forest lands, means the application
                             of forest management in such a manner as to meet two or more
                             specified objectives;
private land                 (q) “private land” means land owned by someone other than the
                             Crown;



                                                              2
                            Forest Management Act                  Cap. F-14                         3



    (r) “Provincial Forest” means an area of Crown forest land                 Provincial Forest
    designated as such under the regulations;
    (r.1) not proclaimed;                                                      registered forest
                                                                               harvester
    (s) “scaling” means the determination of the gross and net volumes         scaling
    of round wood in cords, cubic feet, cubic metres, board feet or
    assumed standards;
    (t) “silvics” means the life history, characteristics and ecology of       silvics
    stands of forest trees;
    (u) “silviculture” means the application of the knowledge of silvics       silviculture
    in the treatment of forest land for the sustained or enhanced
    production of tree growth;
    (v) “site preparation” means the preparation of an area of land for        site preparation
    the planting of trees or to facilitate increased natural regeneration of
    tree species;
    (w) “sustain” in relation to forest management, means the use of           sustain
    silvicultural treatments which
       (i) provide for a consistent flow of forest products and other
       benefits from a defined forest land base,
       (ii) retain the capability of that forest land base to produce
       equivalent or higher quality forest products, and
       (iii) retain the long term capability of the soil on that forest land
       base to produce forest products;
    (x) “wildlife” means any vertebrate animal that is wild by nature in       wildlife
    the province. 1988,c.27,s.1; 1993,c.29,s.4; 1997,c.20,s.3;
    1998,c.88,s.1; 2004,c.36,s.3; 2009,c.73,s.2; 2006,c.16,s.63(4.1).
2. The Minister has the general supervision and management of this Act         Administration
and may designate persons to act on his behalf. 1988,c.27,s.2.
3. The Minister is responsible for the conservation, management and            Responsibilities of
protection of forest lands in accordance with this Act and the regulations.    Minister

1988,c.27,s.3.
4. (1) The Minister shall prepare and cause to be publicly reviewed a          Forest Policy
Forest Policy which shall include
     (a) information on the growth, yield and utilization of the forest,
     with and without management;
     (b) policy objectives and principles of management for forest lands;
     (c) assessment strategy and actions to be employed to achieve those
     objectives and principles of forest management; and
     (d) such other information relating to the forest as is prescribed by
     regulation.


                                     3
4                    Cap. F-14                  Forest Management Act



Revision               (2) The Minister shall cause the Forest Policy to be reviewed by the
                     Department and, if revisions are considered necessary based on this
                     review, he may cause the revisions or the entire Forest Policy to be
                     reviewed publicly in such manner as may be prescribed by regulation.
Availability           (3) The Minister shall make the Forest Policy readily available to any
                     individual requesting it. 1988,c.27,s.4.
Forest Improvement   5. The Minister may establish a Forest Improvement Advisory Council to
Advisory Council     provide advice on
                         (a) the effectiveness of forest management activities;
                         (b) forest research;
                         (c) the training of workers for the forest industry;
                         (d) forest wildlife conservation;
                         (e) forest multiple use;
                         (f) forest education programs; and
                         (g) other matters relating to the conservation and use of forest land.
                         1988,c.27,s.5.
Forest inventory     6. (1) The Minister shall monitor forest growth and, in 1992 and every
and report           ten years thereafter, shall provide to the Lieutenant Governor in Council
                     a State of the Forest Report which includes
                          (a) an inventory of the forest in the province identifying the area of
                          the forest by cover type, the volume of forest products available in
                          the forest, the age distribution of the forest, and an estimate of the
                          growth by product type that the forest can sustain with and without
                          management;
                          (b) a summary of the forest management activities for both Crown
                          forest lands and private land implemented during each year of the
                          ten year reporting period;
                          (c) an estimate of the wood supply shortfalls or surpluses based on
                          projections of forest growth and demand for forest products;
                          (d) an outline of programs proposed to manage the forest in the next
                          reporting period; and
                          (e) such other information as may be prescribed by regulation.
Release of             (2) The Minister may compile and release the information gathered in
information          the development of a forest inventory but shall not release information
                     specific to any individual landowner without the permission of that
                     landowner. 1988,c.27,s.6.
Trespass rights      7. (1) A forest service officer or any person assisting him in the
                     performance of his duties may, under the direction of the Minister, enter
                     upon private lands whenever necessary for the proper performance of his
                     duties under this Act.



                                                         4
                            Forest Management Act                   Cap. F-14                         5



  (2) No action for trespass or nuisance may be brought against the             Idem
Crown or its agents for the doing of any act or the carrying out of any
operation necessarily incidental to the exercise of any duty or power
pursuant to this Act or the regulations. 1988,c.27,s.7.
8. (1) The Minister shall encourage the management of private forest            Management of
lands for the sustained production of forest products in a manner               private forest land

consistent with the Forest Policy and the Provincial Conservation
Strategy.
  (2) The Minister may initiate programs or enter into agreements to            Programs
implement subsection (1).
  (3) The Minister may prepare or promote the preparation of forest             Management plans
management plans for private forest landowners, in such form and
containing such information as may be prescribed by the regulations.
  (4) Private forest management plans shall                                     Preparation of plans
    (a) comply with the Forest Policy and Provincial Conservation
    Strategy;
    (b) be consistent with the silvics of the species; and
    (c) be prepared by
       (i) a forester or forest technician, or
       (ii) a landowner or his representative.
  (5) Private forest management plans prepared under subsection (4)             Review and
must be reviewed by the District Manager and the District Manager shall         approval

have the right to approve a private land forest management plan if it
complies with subsections (3) and (4) or order its alteration if it does not.
  (6) The Minister, in the manner prescribed by regulations, may                Certified forest
designate certified forest producers.                                           producers


   (7) The Minister may, in accordance with the regulations, grant              Grants to producers
financial aid to a certified forest producer. 1988,c.27,s.8.
Sections 8.1 to 8.6 not proclaimed.
9. (1) The Minister is responsible for the conservation, utilization,           Crown forest land
protection and integrated management of Crown forest lands including            management

     (a) harvesting, regeneration and improvement of the timber resource;
     (b) utilization of Crown timber resources for the best end use;
     (c) protection of timber resources from fire, insect and disease, and
     unlawful harvesting, damage or removal;
     (d) access to and travel on Crown forest lands;
     (e) conservation and or enhancement of wildlife resources utilizing
     Crown forest lands;


                                     5
6                 Cap. F-14                   Forest Management Act



                       (f) protection of representative areas of the forest as forested natural
                       areas;
                       (g) provision of forest recreation opportunities on Crown forest
                       lands.
Districts          (2) The Minister may divide Crown forest lands into forest
                  management districts.
Management plan     (3) The Minister shall cause to be prepared a Crown Forest Land
for district      Management Plan for each forest management district in accordance with
                  subsection (4).
Content of          (4) A Crown Forest Land Management Plan shall
management plan       (a) define the lands to which it applies and the purpose and scope of
                      the plan for a twenty year period;
                      (b) provide a general description of the forest land and its ownership
                      for the area under consideration;
                      (c) provide an inventory of the forest for that forest management
                      district;
                      (d) identify the protection needs of the forest;
                      (e) describe the silvics of the major species groupings which will be
                      managed;
                      (f) identify biological, physical and legal constraints on the
                      development of the forest;
                      (g) specify the twenty year planning objectives for the forest
                      management plan;
                      (h) state the management policy for Crown forest land;
                      (i) specify management priorities for the Crown forest land;
                      (j) set out the management strategy and programs for the Crown
                      forest land;
                      (k) set out five year and twenty year operational projections on
                      silvicultural activities and estimates of their impact on supply of
                      forest products and other values for a hundred year period;
                      (l) include such other items as may be prescribed by the regulations.
Operations plan    (5) The Minister shall cause to be prepared a Crown Forest Land
                  Operations Plan for each forest management district.
Content of          (6) Each Crown Forest Land Operations Plan shall
operations plan       (a) cover a five year period;
                      (b) identify the Crown properties on which management and
                      silvicultural work are to be implemented in the first year of the plan;
                      (c) describe the amount and type of work to be undertaken in the
                      following areas:
                         (i) silviculture,
                         (ii) timber harvesting,


                                                        6
                           Forest Management Act                  Cap. F-14                     7



       (iii) road construction and maintenance,
       (iv) forest protection,
       (v) forest extension;
    (d) identify provisions made for multiple use of the forest; and
    (e) include such other items as may be prescribed by the regulations.
  (7) The Minister shall make available to the public copies of the           Publication
District Crown Forest Land Management Plans and the District Crown
Forest Land Operations Plans. 1988,c.27,s.9.
10. (1) The Minister may acquire Crown lands for the following                Acquisition of
purposes:                                                                     Crown lands for
                                                                              forestry
     (a) establishing or increasing the land in a Provincial Forest;
     (b) establishing tree seedling production facilities;
     (c) establishing seed orchards and testing tree seed sources;
     (d) establishing or testing silvicultural enhancement techniques;
     (e) conserving representative forested natural areas and rustic roads;
     (f) monitoring forest growth;
     (g) gaining access to Crown forest land;
     (h) managing surface water levels and runoff on Crown land;
     (i) establishing demonstration woodlots;
     (j) establishing parks or acquiring lands for wildlife conservation;
     (k) producing forest products.
  (2) The Minister may dispose of Crown forest lands not considered           Disposal
essential for the implementation of subsection (1) if
    (a) the sale agreement ensures the proper management and
    conservation of that Crown forest land;
    (b) the sale agreement ensures the retention of free public access
    rights by foot up to all lakes and streams on a corridor ten metres
    wide measured horizontally from the edge of the lake or stream.
  (3) The Minister may lease Crown forest land.                               Lease

  (4) A lease of Crown forest land shall                                      Terms of lease
    (a) be for a period not exceeding ten years except where a longer
    period is provided for the protection of forested natural areas;
    (b) designate the terms and conditions for the management of the
    forest and multiple use resources on the forest lands;
    (c) be assignable only if
       (i) the area to be assigned is not a forested natural area, and
       (ii) the assignee is a bank, trust company or other financial
       institution approved by the Minister;
    (d) be made on such other terms and conditions as may be
    prescribed by regulation;



                                    7
8                  Cap. F-14                   Forest Management Act



                        (e) include a termination clause effective upon failure of the lessee
                        to fulfill the terms and conditions of the lease. 1988,c.27,s.10.
Sales permit       11. (1) The Minister may grant a Crown forest product sales permit to
                   cut, harvest or remove such quantities of timber and other forest products
                   as he considers to be sustainable based on the District Crown Forest
                   Land Management Plan.
Conditions of        (2) A permit shall
permit                 (a) be provided only for publicly tendered timber or other forest
                       products;
                       (b) identify the type and location of forest products to be sold;
                       (c) specify the utilization standards on trees that are to be harvested;
                       (d) specify the price for which the forest product is being sold;
                       (e) specify the condition in which Crown forest roads are to be left
                       at the completion of harvesting, extraction and removal of forest
                       products from the property;
                       (f) not be issued to an individual with outstanding commitments to
                       the Crown for a previously issued Crown forest product sales permit
                       which has expired;
                       (g) indemnify the Crown from any and all legal actions brought as a
                       result of work carried out under the permit;
                       (h) not be valid until signed by the applicant for the permit;
                       (i) give the right to the Crown to inspect the property subject to the
                       permit at any time;
                       (j) specify such other conditions and terms as may be specified by
                       the regulations.
Lien for payment     (3) The timber or other forest products cut, harvested or removed
                   under a permit shall remain the property of the Crown until payment in
                   full is received and the Crown shall have a first lien and charge upon all
                   property subject to the permit until all conditions of the permit are
                   satisfied.
Errors               (4) If in consequence of an incorrect survey or other error or cause
                   whatsoever, a permit is found to cover lands not owned by the Crown,
                   the permit shall be void in so far as it interferes with the lands not owned
                   by the Crown.
Refund of fee        (5) Where a permit is, pursuant to subsection (4), rendered void in
                   whole or in part, the permit holder shall have no claim for compensation
                   except for a refund of the permit fee calculated on a prorated basis on the
                   area of land for which the permit was issued.
Cease and desist     (6) A forest service officer may order a permit holder or his agents to
orders             cease and desist harvesting or removing forest products from all or part


                                                        8
                           Forest Management Act                  Cap. F-14                     9



of the land subject to the permit if in the officer's opinion the permit
holder is in violation of the permit.
   (7) The holder of a permit in respect of which a cease and desist order    No claim for
is issued pursuant to subsection (6) shall have no claim upon the Crown       compensation

for indemnity or compensation by reason of the order. 1988,c.27,s.11.
12. (1) Except as authorized by a valid permit, no person shall               Unlawful cutting or
     (a) cut down or damage timber or other forest products on Crown          removal of timber

     lands; or
     (b) remove from Crown forest land timber or any other property
     belonging to the Crown.
   (2) Any person who violates subsection (1) commits an offence and is       Penalty
liable on summary conviction to a fine of not less than $100 and not
more than $5000.
  (3) A person who is convicted of an offence under clause (1)(a), in         Reforestation costs
addition to any penalty imposed under subsection (2), is liable for the
costs of site preparation and reforestation of the area illegally cut or
damaged and the maintenance of the area until it is free to grow.
  (4) Where, in contravention of subsection (1)                               Seizure
    (a) timber or other forest products are cut down or damaged on
    Crown land;
    (b) timber, forest products or other property belonging to the Crown
    is removed from Crown forest lands,
a forest service officer may seize such timber, forest products or other
property, together with any equipment or vehicle used in cutting down,
damaging or removing of such timber, forest products or other property.
  (5) Where timber or other forest products on Crown forest land have         Idem
been cut down or removed without authority and found mixed with other
timber or other forest products
    (a) other than from Crown forest lands; or
    (b) authorized to be harvested on Crown forest lands,
a forest service officer may seize any such other timber or other forest
products.
  (6) Where a forest service officer has seized timber or other property in   Notice
accordance with this section, that officer shall
    (a) without delay, report the particulars of the seizure to the
    Minister; and
    (b) where he has knowledge of the person who is in actual or
    apparent possession of the timber or other forest products at the time
    of the seizure, give notice to that person of the seizure, either by
    personal service or by registered mail.


                                    9
10                   Cap. F-14                   Forest Management Act



Possession of          (7) Any timber, forest products or equipment seized pursuant to
seized timber        subsection (4) or (5) shall remain in the possession of the Department,
                     pending the outcome of a prosecution under this section.
Return                 (8) In the event that a prosecution has not been initiated within six
                     months of the offence, the property seized shall be returned, within a
                     reasonable time, to the owner or the person who was in actual or
                     apparent possession at the time of the seizure.
Exception              (9) Notwithstanding subsection (8), property which cannot be
                     distinguished or separated from Crown timber or Crown forest products,
                     shall remain in the possession of the Department.
Property of Crown      (10) Timber or forest products seized under this section, become the
on conviction        property of the Crown in the event that a guilty plea or verdict is entered
                     on a prosecution under subsection (2).
Return to owner of     (11) Subject to subsection (12), equipment seized under this section
equipment seized     shall be returned to the owner or person from whom it was seized, within
                     sixty days of the final disposition of a prosecution under this section or at
                     the expiry of six and a half months from the date of the offence, if no
                     prosecution is instituted.
Forfeiture             (12) The judge may order, in addition to any penalty imposed under
                     this section, that any or all equipment seized in connection with the
                     offence is forfeited to the Crown. 1988,c.27,s.12; 1994,c.58,s.6.
Obstruction of       13. (1) No person shall
forest service            (a) obstruct;
officer
                          (b) cause to be obstructed; or
                          (c) incite others to obstruct,
                     a forest service officer in the exercise of his authority under the Act, or
                     any person assisting him in the exercise of that authority.
Penalty                 (2) Any person who violates subsection (1) commits an offence and is
                     liable on summary conviction to a fine of not less than $100 and not
                     more than $2000. 1988,c.27,s.13; 1994,c.58,s.6.
Crown forest land    14. (1) The Minister may construct and maintain a forest road on Crown
roads                forest land.
Standards              (2) The construction or maintenance of a forest road shall be in
                     accordance with standards prescribed by regulation.
Closure                (3) The Minister may by order close a forest road to travel by any class
                     of vehicle or by any person as specified in the order.




                                                          10
                           Forest Management Act                 Cap. F-14                    11



  (4) Where the Minister issues an order under subsection (3) he shall       Signs
post or erect signs to indicate the closure.
  (5) No person other than a forest service officer or other person          Violation of order
authorized by the Minister shall violate an order made under subsection
(3).
  (6) No person other than a forest service officer or a person authorized   Defacement, etc. of
by him shall remove or deface a sign posted or erected by the Minister       signs

pursuant to subsection (4).
  (7) No person may operate on a forest road bridge a vehicle having a       Vehicle weight
total loaded weight in excess of that determined by the Minister and
posted at the site.
  (8) A person who violates subsection (5), (6) or (7) commits an            Penalty
offence and is liable on summary conviction to a fine of not less than
$100 and not more than $1000.
  (9) No claim for damages may be made by any person using a forest          Claims
road by reason of damage or personal injury resulting from a defect in
construction, improvement or maintenance of a forest road.
1988,c.27,s.14; 1994,c.58,s.6.
15. The Minister may build and operate facilities to                         Facilities
    (a) produce seedlings for reforestation, conservation of land,
    wildlife, and water, or for beautification;
    (b) produce genetically improved tree seed for use in seedling
    production programs;
    (c) deliver forest education programs;
    (d) deliver private land forest management plans;
    (e) deliver forest management on Crown land;
    (f) deliver technology transfer programs;
    (g) deliver forest fire detection, prevention and control programs;
    (h) implement forest management programs. 1988,c.27,s.15.
16. The Minister may, by regulation, designate classes of fuelwood.          Fuelwood
1988,c.27,s.16.                                                              categories


17. (1) The Minister may issue scaling and grading licenses in               Scaling and grading
accordance with the regulations.
  (2) Where a dispute arises regarding a scaled volume of wood, the          Disputes
Minister may designate an individual holding a valid scaling license
under subsection (1) for that type of wood to arbitrate the volume of
wood under dispute.




                                    11
12                     Cap. F-14                  Forest Management Act



Remuneration             (3) An arbitrator appointed under subsection (2) shall receive such
                       compensation and shall report on the arbitration decision in such manner
                       as may be prescribed by the regulations. 1988,c.27,s.17.
Disease control        18. The Minister may, by regulation, establish forest insect and disease
                       control measures pertaining to the importation, destruction, seizure,
                       movement and inspection of plants or plant materials which may harbour
                       insects or cryptogamic disease. 1988,c.27,s.18.
Forest conservation    19. The Minister may place such restrictions on the harvesting or
                       extraction of trees within twenty metres of a body of water or within
                       forty metres on either side of the midline of a designated scenic heritage
                       road, as may be prescribed by regulation. 1988,c.27,s.19.
Market                 20. The Minister may initiate programs to support and encourage
development                (a) the further development of markets for forest products if growth,
                           yield and availability studies show the forest resource can produce
                           the forest products for those markets on a sustainable basis;
                           (b) the further development of the forest industry to produce graded
                           lumber or other forest products;
                           (c) the further development of the abilities of landowners to
                           conserve, protect and utilize the forest in a manner consistent with
                           the Forest Policy and Provincial Conservation Strategy.
                           1988,c.27,s.20.
Information            21. The Minister may request any person engaged in the forest industry
                       to provide such information as the Minister may request for the better
                       administration of this Act. 1988,c.27,s.21.
Forest fire recovery   22. The Minister may enter into agreements with private landowners to
program                reclaim or regenerate forest land devastated by fire. 1988,c.27,s.22.
Liability              23. An official or employee of the Department is not personally liable for
                       any damages occasioned by the performance in good faith of his duty or
                       by his carrying out orders or instructions received by him from a
                       supervisor. 1988,c.27,s.23.
Idem, Crown land       24. The Crown shall not be liable for any injury or damage occurring on
                       Crown land howsoever caused. 1988,c.27,s.24.
Regulations            25. The Lieutenant Governor in Council may make regulations
                           (a) prescribing the contents of a Forest Policy and the manner in
                           which it is to be reviewed;
                           (b) respecting the composition, appointment of members, term of
                           appointment of members, remuneration of members, and operating
                           procedures for the Forest Improvement Advisory Council;
                           (c) regarding the training of forest workers;


                                                           12
                       Forest Management Act                   Cap. F-14   13



(d) respecting forest inventories;
(e) prescribing the contents of a forest inventory and report;
(f) establishing methods of calculating sustained yield;
(g) establishing a site index designation system;
(h) respecting Crown forest land boundaries;
(i) establishing programs for the management of private forest land;
(j) establishing the format, information content, and term of forest
management plans for private lands;
(k) establishing the criteria for the certification of forest producers,
the items for which a certified forest producer shall be eligible, the
manner of application and the amount of any fees payable, and the
criteria for payment for eligible claims;
(l) establishing Provincial Forests;
(m) establishing forest management districts;
(n) respecting Crown Forest Land Management Plans, Crown forest
land operations plans and the management of Crown forest land;
(o) respecting the leasing or sale of Crown forest lands;
(p) specifying the terms and conditions of a Crown forest product
sales permit;
(q) respecting utilization standards for the harvesting, extraction and
sale of forest products from Crown forest lands;
(r) prescribing classes, construction and maintenance standards and
restriction of access on forest roads;
(s) designating fuelwood classes and advertising standards for
fuelwood;
(t) respecting the scaling of wood, the measurement or estimation of
wood chip volume, the grading of forest products, and the issuing of
scaling licenses and grading licenses;
(u) respecting the appointment, terms of payment, and reports
applicable to scaling arbitrators;
(v) respecting the importation, destruction, seizure, movement and
identification of plants or plant materials which harbour insects or
cryptogamic disease;
(w) respecting the conservation and harvesting or the extraction of
forest products from forests along streams, lakes and scenic heritage
roads;
(x) regarding the collection, use and confidentiality of forest product
sales information;
(y) prescribing penalties for failure to comply with this Act or the
regulations;
(z) prescribing any fees or other charges to be payable pursuant to
this Act or the regulations. 1988,s.25,c.27; 1998,c.88,s. 25.




                                13
