                         PLEASE NOTE
This document, prepared by the Legislative Counsel Office, is an office
consolidation of this Act, current to November 1, 2003. It is intended for
information and reference purposes only.

This document is not the official version of the Act. The Act and the
amendments as printed under the authority of the Queen’s Printer for the
province should be consulted to determine the authoritative statement of the
law.

For more information concerning the history of this Act, please see the
Table of Public Acts.

If you find any errors or omissions in this consolidation, please contact:

                          Legislative Counsel Office
                             Tel: (902) 368-4291
                         Email: legislation@gov.pe.ca
                          CHAPTER L-5

     PRINCE EDWARD ISLAND LANDS PROTECTION ACT


                         INTERPRETATION
1. (1) In this Act                                                           Definitions

    (a) repealed by 1995,c.22,s.1;                                           agriculture

    (b) “aggregate land holding”                                             aggregate land
       (i) in relation to a person, includes                                 holding

           (A) all land holdings of that person, and of the person’s minor
           children,
           (B) the relevant amount of land holdings of any corporation in
           which the person, or any of them, hold more than 5 per cent of
           the shares, and
           (C) the relevant amount of land holdings of any other
           corporation in which more than 5 per cent of the shares are
           held by a corporation in which the shareholder or the
           shareholder’s minor children own more than 5 per cent of the
           shares,
       (ii) in relation to a corporation, includes
           (A) all land holdings of that corporation,
           (B) all land holdings of any person, and of the person’s minor
           children, who holds more than 5 per cent of the shares in that
           corporation,
           (C) all land holdings of any other corporation that holds more
           than 5 per cent of the shares in that corporation, and
           (D) the relevant amount of land holdings of any other
           corporation in which more than 5 per cent of the shares are
           held by
              (I) that corporation,
              (II) a person referred to in paragraph (B), or
              (III) a corporation referred to in paragraph (C).
    (c) “Commission” means the Island Regulatory and Appeals                 Commission
    Commission established under section 2 of the Island Regulatory
    and Appeals Commission Act, R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap. I-11;
    (d) “corporation” includes a partnership, cooperative association or     corporation
    body corporate whether formed or incorporated under the law of this
    province or any other province or of Canada or outside of Canada,
    and for the purposes of this Act a corporation and other corporations




                                     1
2                    Cap. L-5            Prince Edward Island Lands Protection Act



                          directly or indirectly controlled by the same person, group or
                          organization shall be deemed to be one corporation;
farm corporation
                          (e) repealed by 1990,c.28,s.1;
hold                      (e.1) “hold”, in relation to shares, includes shares held by any
                          trustee, legal representative, agent or other intermediary, as well as a
                          person or corporation that has beneficial ownership of such shares;
land                      (f) “land” means real property in the province but does not include
                          any parcel of land, existing on May 1, 1995, of less than one acre
                          that is situated within a city or town;
land holding              (g) “land holding” means, subject to subsection (3), an interest
                          conferring the right to use, possession or occupation of land, but
                          does not include land or an interest in land acquired by a bank, trust
                          company or other financial institution in the ordinary course of its
                          business by way of security for a debt or other obligation;
Minister                  (h) “Minister” means that member of the Executive Council charged
                          by order of the Lieutenant Governor in Council with the
                          administration of this Act;
municipality              (i) repealed by 1995,c.22,s.1;
person                    (j) “person” means a natural person;
resident person           (k) “resident person” means a person who resides in the province for
                          one hundred and eighty-three days or more a year;
share                     (l) “share” means
                              (i) in relationship to a partnership or co-operative association, a
                              unit representing a proportion of the ownership of the partnership
                              or association;
                              (ii) in relation to a corporation, an issued share carrying voting
                              rights under all circumstances or by reason of the occurrence of
                              an event that has occurred and that is continuing, and includes
                                  (A) a security currently convertible into such a share, and
                                  (B) currently exercisable options and rights to acquire such a
                                  share or such a convertible security.
Deemed interest in     (1.1) Any person or corporation that holds shares in a corporation is
land                 deemed to have an interest in land to the extent of the relevant amount of
                     land holdings as prescribed by subsection (2).
Relevant amount,       (2) For the purposes of clause (1)(b), the relevant amount is
calculation of       determined by multiplying the total land holding of the corporation by
                     the proportion that the number of shares in that corporation held by the
                     shareholder and, if the shareholder is a person by his minor children



                                                            2
                   Prince Edward Island Lands Protection Act       Cap. L-5                        3



bears to the total number of shares in the corporation but where the total
land holding of a corporation exceeds the limit imposed by clause 2(b),
the amount of the excess shall, subject to section 6.2, be excluded in the
calculation of the relevant amount in respect of a person or corporation
that owns shares in that corporation.
  (3) For the purpose of calculating the aggregate land holding of any        Calculation of
person or corporation                                                         aggregate land
                                                                              holding
    (a) at any time before January 1, 1996, land under lease to another
    person or corporation shall be deemed to be in the possession of that
    other person or corporation;
    (b) on or after January 1, 1996, land under lease to another person or
    corporation shall be deemed to be in the possession of both the
    lessor and lessee.
  (4) For the purpose of calculating the aggregate land holding of any        Land held on trust
person or corporation land held on trust shall be deemed to be in the
possession of both the trustee and the beneficiary.
  (5) For the purpose of calculating the aggregate land holding of any        Attribution, tenants
person or corporation                                                         in common and
                                                                              joint tenants
    (a) where land is held by tenants in common, the land holding
    attributed to each tenant in common shall be equal to the proportion
    of each tenant’s interest in the land;
    (b) where land is held by joint tenants, the land holding attributed to
    each joint tenant shall be deemed to be equal to the proportion of
    each tenant’s interest in the land as if the land were held by tenancy
    in common;
    (c) where shore frontage is held by tenants in common, the shore
    frontage attributed to each tenant in common shall be equal to the
    proportion of each tenant’s interest in the land;
    (d) where shore frontage is held by joint tenants, the shore frontage
    attributed to each joint tenant shall be deemed to be equal to the
    proportion of each tenant’s interest in the land as if the land were
    held by tenancy in common. 1982,c.16,s.1; 1990,c.28,s.1;
    1995,c.22,s.1; 1996,c.22,s.1; 1998,c.79,s.1; 2002,c.32,s.1.

                                 PURPOSE
1.1 The purpose of this Act is to provide for the regulation of property      Purpose
rights in Prince Edward Island, especially the amount of land that may be
held by a person or corporation. This Act has been enacted in the
recognition that Prince Edward Island faces singular challenges with
regard to property rights as a result of several circumstances, including




                                      3
4                     Cap. L-5           Prince Edward Island Lands Protection Act



                           (a) historical difficulties with absentee land owners, and the
                           consequent problems faced by the inhabitants of Prince Edward
                           Island in governing their own affairs, both public and private;
                           (b) the province’s small land area and comparatively high population
                           density, unique among the provinces of Canada; and
                           (c) the fragile nature of the province’s ecology, environment, and
                           lands and the resultant need for the exercise of prudent, balanced,
                           and steadfast stewardship to ensure the protection of the province’s
                           ecology, environment, and lands. 1998,c.79,s.20.

                                        CONTROL OF LAND HOLDINGS
Maximum land          2. Subject to section 6.1,
holdings                  (a) no person shall have an aggregate land holding in excess of 1000
                          acres;
                          (b) no corporation shall have an aggregate land holding in excess of
                          3000 acres. 1982,c.16,s.2; 1995,c.22,s.2,16.
Computation of        3. For the avoidance of doubt it is declared that a land holding acquired
aggregate             before May 7, 1982 shall be taken into account in determining the
                      aggregate land holding of any person or corporation for the purposes of
                      this Act. 1982,c.16,s.3; 1998,c.79,s.3.
Non-resident person   4. A person who is not a resident person shall not have an aggregate land
                      holding in excess of five acres or having a shore frontage in excess of
                      one hundred and sixty-five feet unless he first receives permission to do
                      so from the Lieutenant Governor in Council. 1982,c.16,s.4;
                      1988,c.37,s.1; 1995,c.22,s.2,16.
Corporations          5. (1) A corporation shall not have an aggregate land holding in excess of
                      five acres or having a shore frontage in excess of one hundred and sixty-
                      five feet unless it first receives permission to do so from the Lieutenant
                      Governor in Council.
Idem                    (2) Repealed by 1990,c.28,s.2.
Transitional          5.1 Where an aggregate land holding not exceeding ten acres in area or
provisions            having a shore frontage of less than three hundred and thirty feet has
                      been lawfully acquired by a non-resident person or corporation in
                      accordance with the law in force at the time of acquisition, it shall be
                      deemed to be held in compliance with this Act as if a permit therefor had
                      been granted under section 4 or 5, as the case may be. 1995,c.22,s.3.
Transitional          5.2 Where an aggregate land holding in excess of five acres or having a
provisions            shore frontage in excess of one hundred and sixty-five feet has been
                      acquired by a resident person who subsequently ceases to be a resident



                                                            4
                   Prince Edward Island Lands Protection Act      Cap. L-5                      5



person, he or she may continue to have and hold that hand holding
without obtaining a permit under section 4. 1995,c.22,s.3.
                                                                             Application to lease
5.3 (1) Where a person or corporation intends to acquire by lease a land     land
holding for which permission is required pursuant to section 4 or section
5, the person or corporation shall
     (a) apply pursuant to section 4 or 5 for permission to acquire by
     lease that specific land holding; or
     (b) apply for permission pursuant to this section to acquire by lease
     and to continue to hold a certain number of acres of land as part of
     the applicant’s aggregate land holding.
   (2) Where permission has been granted by the Lieutenant Governor in       Annual statement
Council for a lease of land pursuant to an application made under clause
(1)(b), the person or corporation shall
     (a) within one year of receiving permission; and
     (b) in every subsequent year, prior to December 31,
file a statement disclosing information prescribed by subsection (3).
  (3) The statement required by subsection (2) shall disclose                Information
     (a) the parcel number;                                                  required in
                                                                             statement
     (b) the acreage leased; and
     (c) the term of the lease or leases;
for each parcel leased during the reporting period covered by the
statement.
  (4) Where a person or corporation permitted to hold land pursuant to       Increase in land
this section intends to increase the amount of land held beyond the          holding

amount previously permitted by the Lieutenant Governor in Council, a
new application shall be made by the person or corporation.
  (5) Where a person or corporation permitted to hold land pursuant to       Variance of land
this section intends to vary the amount of land held, but not to increase    holding

the amount of land held beyond the amount previously permitted by the
Lieutenant Governor in Council, no new application need be made
pursuant to this section. 1998,c.79,s.4.
6. For the avoidance of doubt it is declared that where a person or          Subsequent
corporation has an aggregate land holding for which permission is            acquisitions

required under section 4 or 5, any subsequent acquisition of a land
holding by that person or corporation similarly requires such permission
except where the aggregate land holding, including the land holding
proposed to be acquired, is less than the maximum prescribed by that
section. 1982,c.16,s.6; 1995,c.22,s.16.
6.1 (1) Where a person or corporation has on December 31, 1994, an           Transitional
aggregate land holding that exceeds the limit set out in section 2           provisions




                                      5
6                  Cap. L-5            Prince Edward Island Lands Protection Act



                        (a) as a result of the change in the method of calculation effected by
                        clause 1(3)(b);
                        (b) by virtue of a special permit held by the person or corporation; or
                        (c) for any other reason;
                   the person or corporation shall, before June 1, 1996,
                        (d) submit a land holding disclosure statement to the Commission in
                        the form prescribed in the regulations; and
                        (e) apply for a permit under this section.
Late filing          (1.1) Notwithstanding subsection (1), the Commission shall consider
                   any application filed pursuant to subsection (1) that is filed
                       (a) after June 1, 1996; and
                       (b) within thirty days of the coming into force of this section.
Existing land        (2) Upon application for a permit under subsection (1), the Lieutenant
holding, permit    Governor in Council may issue a permit authorizing the holder to have
                   and continue to have an aggregate land holding in excess of the limit set
                   out in section 2, subject to
                        (a) the divestiture schedule;
                        (b) clause (4)(a); and
                        (c) any other conditions the Lieutenant Governor in Council may
                        place on the permit.
Effect of permit     (3) A permit issued under subsection (2) shall include a divestiture
                   schedule that requires the divestiture of that portion of the aggregate land
                   holding of the holder in excess of the limit set out in section 2, as
                   follows:
                        (a) at least fifty per cent of the excess land holding shall be divested
                        within five years from the date the permit was issued;
                        (b) at least eighty per cent of the excess land holding shall be
                        divested within seven years from the date the permit was issued; and
                        (c) the holder shall comply with the limit set out in section 2 within
                        nine years from the date the permit was issued.
Conditions           (4) A permit issued under subsection (2)
                       (a) shall be issued subject to the condition that the holder of the
                       permit shall ensure that the amount of land in excess of the limit set
                       out in section 2 shall at all times prior to divestiture be leased to
                       another person or corporation;
                       (b) may be issued subject to any other conditions that the Lieutenant
                       Governor in Council may determine; and
                       (c) shall not authorize an aggregate land holding in excess of the
                       aggregate land holding of the applicant on December 31, 1994,
                       taking into account the calculation under clause 1(3)(b).
Permit transfer      (5) A permit issued under subsection (2) is


                                                          6
                    Prince Edward Island Lands Protection Act         Cap. L-5                      7



    (a) in the case of a person, not transferable except to a spouse,
    sibling or direct descendant or ancestor of that person in accordance
    with any conditions the Lieutenant Governor in Council may
    prescribe; and
    (b) in the case of a corporation, not transferable. 1998,c.79,s.5.
6.2 Where a person or corporation that holds shares in a corporation (the        Transitional
parent corporation) has an aggregate land holding that would have                provision, re lease-
                                                                                 out and divestiture
exceeded the limit set out in section 2 except for the exclusion in the          of land
determination of the relevant amount pursuant to subsection 1(2) of
excess land owned by the parent corporation, the person or corporation
shall ensure that the amount of land that is in excess of the limit set out in
section 2 shall at all times be leased to another person or corporation and
divested in the same way as if a permit had been issued under section
6.1. 1998,c.79,s.6.
7. Repealed by 1992,c.38,s.1.                                                    Special permits

8. (1) The Commission shall                                                      Review of
     (a) review all applications under sections 4, 5, and 5.3;                   applications

     (b) obtain information pertinent to the application;
     (c) recommend to the Lieutenant Governor in Council on the
     disposition of the application; and
     (d) recommend to the Lieutenant Governor in Council on a
     divestiture schedule for each applicant pursuant to section 6.1.
  (2) Recommendations made by the Commission under subsection (1)                Basis for review
shall be based on the following considerations:
     (a) an assessment of the best use of the land based on the guidelines
     and policies established by the Lieutenant Governor in Council
     under clause 7(a) of the Planning Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap. P-8;
     (b) the most effective manner of ensuring the best land use;
     (c) such other matters in relation to the economic and cultural needs
     of the people of the province as may be specified in policies adopted
     under section 8.1.
  (3) The Lieutenant Governor in Council, in determining whether or not          Consideration of
to grant a permit under section 4 or 5, shall consider the                       Commission’s
                                                                                 recommendation
recommendations of the Commission. 1982,c.16,s.9; 1991,c.18,s.22;
1992,c.38,s.3; 1995,c.22,s.5; 1996,c.22,s.4; 1998,c.79,s.7.
8.1 The Lieutenant Governor in Council may adopt policies regarding              Policies
the ownership, possession, occupation or use of land and such policies
shall be published in the Gazette. 1995,c.22,s.6.




                                       7
8                     Cap. L-5           Prince Edward Island Lands Protection Act



                      9. (1) The Lieutenant Governor in Council may impose such conditions
Conditions of
permit under
                      on a permit issued under section 4 or 5 as he may consider expedient
section 4 or 5        including a condition
                           (a) that the land not be subdivided except for
                              (i) use for the purposes of agricultural, forestry or fisheries
                              production,
                              (ii) conservation use pursuant to a designation as a natural area
                              under the Natural Areas Protection Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap. N-
                              2, an archaeological site under the Archaeological Sites
                              Protection Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap. A-17 or a heritage place
                              under the Heritage Places Protection Act R.S.P.E.I. 1998, Cap.
                              H-3.1,
                              (iii) parks use by the Federal, provincial or a municipal
                              government,
                              (iv) residential use by the owner;
                           (b) that the land be identified under the land identification program;
                           (c) that the land be consolidated with an adjoining parcel or parcels
                           of land;
                           (d) that the applicant become a resident within such period of time
                           as may be specified in the permit.
Variation, etc.         (2) Subject to subsection (3), the Lieutenant Governor in Council may
                      cancel, suspend, or amend any condition imposed under subsection (1)
                      upon receipt of an application by a permit holder.
Notice required for     (3) Every application made by a permit holder pursuant to subsection
variation             (2) shall be supported by a notice that shall
application
                           (a) be in the form prescribed by regulation;
                           (b) have been published in a newspaper circulating in the area where
                           the land is located, with the publication to have occurred at least
                           seven days prior to receipt of the application by the Commission;
                           and
                           (c) state to the Commission the intent to make the application and
                           the details of the variation applied for. 1998,c.79,s.8.

                                        ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
Disclosure            10. (1) The Minister or the Commission may request any person or
statement, on         corporation believed to have an aggregate land holding
request
                           (a) in the case of a person, of more than 750 acres; or
                           (b) in the case of a corporation, of more than 2,250 acres,
                      to make a land holding disclosure statement in the form prescribed in the
                      regulations.
Annual disclosure       (2) Without prejudice to subsection (1), any person or corporation
statement             having an aggregate land holding in excess of the limit specified in


                                                            8
                    Prince Edward Island Lands Protection Act        Cap. L-5                        9



subsection (1) shall, not later than December 31 of each year, file a
disclosure statement with the Commission.
  (3) Repealed by 1998,c,79,s.9.                                                Penalty
                                                                                Contents of
11. (1) A disclosure statement shall include particulars of the following:      disclosure statement
     (a) the acreage of each parcel comprised in the aggregate land
     holding;
     (b) the parcel number as set out on the most recent assessment notice
     under the Real Property Assessment Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap. R-4;
     (c) the nature of the interest held and where that interest is a
     leasehold interest, the term of lease, and where the interest is held on
     trust, the name and address of the beneficial owner,
and in the case of a corporation,
     (d) the classes of shares, and the number of shares in each class;
     (e) the name and address of each shareholder holding more than 5
     per cent of the shares and the proportion to the total number of
     voting shares held by each such shareholder;
     (f) any transfer of 10 per cent or more of the shares which has been
     made since the last disclosure statement.
  (2) Where a disclosure statement has been made under section 10 by a          Changes in
person or corporation in any year, the disclosure statement delivered in        particulars

any subsequent year shall disclose only any changes to the particulars
provided in the original statement.
  (3) Repealed by 1998,c.79,s.10.                                               Exception

11.1 Where the Minister, upon request of a person or corporation, is            Sufficient
satisfied that it is not in the public interest for the shareholdings of        compliance

individual shareholders to be disclosed, the Minister may accept as
sufficient compliance with the requirement for a land holding disclosure
statement under section 6.1 or sections 10 and 11, or for the purposes of
an application for permission under sections 4 or 5, a statement that
indicates
     (a) the aggregate land holding of the corporation certified by an
     officer of the corporation; and
     (b) the names and addresses of each shareholder holding more than
     5 per cent of the shares of the corporation. 1998,c.79,s.11.
12. (1) Where he has reasonable and probable grounds to believe that            Orders by Minister
any person or corporation has contravened section 2, 4, 5, 5.3, 6.1, or 6.2
of this Act, the Minister may issue an order requiring that person or
corporation
     (a) to reduce his aggregate land holding to the maximum permitted
     by section 2;


                                       9
10                   Cap. L-5            Prince Edward Island Lands Protection Act



                          (b) to make application for and obtain any permit required by section
                          4 or section 5; or
                          (c) repealed by 1998,c.79,s.12.
Enforcement
                       (2) Where any person or corporation fails to comply with an order of
                     the Minister under subsection (1) within three months of the date on
                     which the order is served, the Minister may apply to a judge of the
                     Supreme Court, who shall enforce compliance with this Act and may
                     make one or more of the following orders:
                         (a) an order declaring null and void any instrument or document by
                         which a land holding is or may be had in contravention of this Act;
                         (b) an order for the sale of the land holding held in contravention of
                         this Act and the distribution of the proceeds from the sale to such
                         persons as may be entitled thereto;
                         (c) an order directing the registrar to cancel the registration of a deed
                         of conveyance or other document registered under the Registry Act
                         R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap. R-10;
                         (d) an order to return any consideration given under an instrument or
                         a document made in contravention of this Act;
                         (e) an order for possession of the land holding to be given to such
                         persons as may be entitled thereto;
                         (e.1) an order declaring null and void a permit issued pursuant to
                         subsection 6.1(2);
                         (f) an order respecting costs;
                         (g) such other order as may be necessary to give effect to the
                         provisions of this Act or as to him seems just. 1982,c.16,s.13;
                         1995,c.22,s.16; 1998,c.79,s.12.
Offences             13. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, a person or corporation that
                          (a) has contravened section 2, 4, 5, or 5.3;
                          (b) fails to make a land holding disclosure statement when required
                          to do so under subsection 10(1) or (2); or
                          (c) fails to comply with the divestiture schedule or other conditions
                          of a permit issued under section 6.1
                     is guilty of an offence and is liable on summary conviction to a fine not
                     exceeding $250,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two
                     years, or both.
Order of Supreme       (2) Where a person or corporation has been convicted of an offence
Court                under subsection (1), a judge of the Supreme Court may, on the
                     application of the Minister, order the person or corporation to divest such
                     amount of land as may be specified in the order for the purpose of
                     ensuring compliance with this Act. 1995,c.22,s.10; 1998,c.79,s.13.
Liability of         14. Where a corporation has committed an offence against this Act,
corporate officers   every officer, director or agent of the corporation who directed,


                                                            10
                   Prince Edward Island Lands Protection Act        Cap. L-5                    11



authorized, assented to or acquiesced or participated in the commission
of the offence is guilty of an offence and liable on summary conviction
to a fine of not more than $250,000 or to imprisonment for a term of not
more than two years, or to both such fine and imprisonment, whether or
not the corporation has been prosecuted or convicted. 1982,c.16,s.15;
1995,c.22,s.11.
15. (1) The Minister, the Commission or any person authorized by the           Minister may
Minister may request information and conduct an investigation for the          conduct
                                                                               investigations
purpose of determining whether a person or corporation has contravened
this Act or the regulations.
   (2) The person conducting the investigation under subsection (1) may        Production of
at all reasonable times demand the production of and inspect all or any of     documents

the books, documents, papers or records of the person or corporation in
respect of which the investigation or inquiry is being made or any record
of the Commission relating to that person or corporation.
  (3) A person or corporation failing to comply with a demand under            Offence
subsection (2) is guilty of an offence and liable on summary conviction
to a fine of not more than $250,000 or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding two years, or to both such fine and imprisonment.
  (4) Where a person or corporation fails to comply with a request under       Order of Supreme
subsection (1), a judge of the Supreme Court may, on the application of        Court

the Minister, make an order
    (a) requiring the production of all books, documents, papers or
    records of the person or corporation;
    (b) otherwise appearing to the court to be necessary. 1982,c.16,s.16;
    1995,c.22,s.10; 1996,c.22,s.6; 1998,c.79,s.14.
15.1 (1) Notwithstanding any other provision of the Act, a person or           Penalty
corporation that
    (a) has contravened section 2, 4, 5, 5.3, 6.1 or 6.2;
    (b) fails to comply with a divestiture schedule or any other condition
    of a permit issued pursuant to section 6.1;
    (c) fails to make a land holding disclosure statement when requested
    to do so under subsection 10(1);
    (d) fails to file a disclosure statement pursuant to subsection 10(2);
    (e) fails to comply with a demand under subsection 15(2);
    (f) fails, neglects, omits or refuses to do any act or thing required of
    that person or corporation by this Act, the regulations, any order of
    the Commission or any order of the Minister; or
    (g) violates this Act, the regulations, any order of the Commission or
    any order of the Minister



                                      11
12                 Cap. L-5            Prince Edward Island Lands Protection Act



                   is liable to a penalty imposed by the Commission of not more than
                   $10,000.
Separate daily
liability            (2) Each day during which a prohibited activity subject to a penalty
                   pursuant to subsection (1) is continued gives rise to a separate liability to
                   a penalty imposed by the Commission not exceeding $500 for each day.
Application to       (3) If any person or corporation fails to pay any penalty imposed by
Supreme Court      the Commission within the time fixed by the Commission for the
                   payment of the penalty, the Commission may make application, without
                   notice to the person or corporation, to a judge of the Supreme Court for
                   an order that judgment for the amount of the penalty or any unpaid
                   portion of the penalty may be entered in the court against the person or
                   corporation.
Order                (4) The judge shall grant the order referred to in subsection (3) on
                   proof by affidavit of the order imposing the penalty and the amount of
                   the penalty remaining unpaid.
Execution             (5) On any judgment entered under this section, execution may be
                   issued as on any other final judgment of the Supreme Court.
                   1998,c.79,s.15.
Proof              16. In any proceeding under this Act, the onus of proving that a person is
                   a resident person is upon that person. 1998,c.79,s.16.
Regulations        17. (1) The Lieutenant Governor in Council may make regulations for
                   giving effect to the intent of this Act and without prejudice to the
                   generality thereof regulations may be made
                        (a) defining any word or expression used in this Act and not defined
                        herein;
                        (b) exempting persons or corporations or classes of corporations or
                        land holdings or classes of land holdings from this Act or any
                        provision thereof and attaching conditions to any such exemptions;
                        (c) prescribing forms to be used and the information to be required
                        in disclosure statements;
                        (d) establishing a land identification program;
                        (e) prescribing conditions respecting the transferability of a permit
                        pursuant to subsection 6.1(5);
                        (f) authorizing the use of any kind of form required for the better
                        administration of this Act or the regulations.
Exemptions to be     (2) Where any exemption is granted by regulations under clause (1)(b)
laid before        the Minister shall table in the Legislative Assembly a statement
Legislative
Assembly           indicating the reasons therefor. 1982,c.16,s.18; 1986,c.15,s.1;
                   1991,c.18,s.22; 1995,c.22,s.14; 1998,c.79,s.17.



                                                          12
                   Prince Edward Island Lands Protection Act     Cap. L-5                       13



17.1. The Commission may make regulations
                                                                            Registration of
    (a) prescribing the procedure in respect of applications for permits;   leases
    (b) prescribing a processing fee in respect of an application for a
    permit. 1991,c.18,s.22; 1992,c.38,s.6.
17.2 The Commission may, with the approval of the Lieutenant                Administration,
Governor in Council, administer regulations made under clause 17(1)(d).     land identification

1996,c.22,s.7.
18. Repealed by 1995,c.22,s.15.                                             Lease registration

19. This Act does not bind the Crown or a Crown corporation named in        Crown
Schedule B or C of the Financial Administration Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988,
Cap. F-9. 1982,c.16,s.21.
20. Where a person or corporation is required to divest land holdings       No entitlement to
pursuant to this Act                                                        compensation or
                                                                            damages
    (a) the person or corporation is not entitled to compensation of any
    kind from the Government of Prince Edward Island;
    (b) the person or corporation is not entitled to any damages for loss
    of property or breach of any lease or contract made necessary by
    divesting land holdings pursuant to the divestiture schedule;
    (c) the person or corporation is precluded from bringing any action
    for recovery of damages in any court; and
    (d) the Expropriation Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap. E-13 does not apply
    to the divestiture. 1998,c.79,s.18.
21. (1) Any land conveyed by the Crown or any of the Crown’s agencies       Presumption
is presumed to be identified for non-development use under the Land
Identification Program established under this Act, unless the Lieutenant
Governor in Council otherwise determines.
  (2) Notwithstanding subsection (1), land conveyed by the Crown or an      Exemption
agent of the Crown is not presumed to be land identified for non-
development use if the regulations provide that the Land Identification
Program does not apply to that land. 1998,c.79,s.19; 2002,c.15,s.1.




                                      13
