Manure
Management
Guidelines




2006
                               Table of Contents

Foreword . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
2. Statement of Intent. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
3. Regulatory Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
4. Siting of Manure Storage Facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
5. Manure Storage Design Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
    – System and Site Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
    – Storage Volume . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
    – Type of Storage. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
    – Safety Factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
6. Land Application of Manure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
7. Manure Odour Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
8. Manure Transportation Guidelines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
9. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
10. Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19



                                           List of Tables

Table 1 Recommended Minimum Separation Distances for New
        Livestock Facilities
Table 2 Manure Production (total per finishing period)
Table 3 Manure Production per animal per day
Table 4 Minimum Separation Distances for Spreading Manure
Table 5 Animals Required to Equal One Livestock Unit Requiring 1 ha
        (2.5 acres) of Land for Manure Application




                                                     1
2
                                      Foreword
The purpose of the Manure Management Guidelines is to promote the effective use of
animal manure as a valuable fertilizer source and soil amendment, while providing
instruction in environmental protection. Improperly handled manure can leach through
soil and contaminate ground water supplies or run into water courses, possibly
contaminating drinking water or irrigation supplies, or adversely affecting fish and fish
habitat. Livestock producers who follow these guidelines will gain the best advantage from
their manure resource, while reducing the potential for soil and water contamination and
nuisance odours.

These Manure Management Guidelines apply to all livestock operations of beef, dairy,
sheep, goat, turkey, layer, broiler, hogs, horses and mink where the storage, handling and
use of animal manure constitutes a significant component of the farm operation. All new,
renovated or existing farming operations are encouraged to follow the recommendations
provided in the guidelines.

This document describes the components of manure storage and establishes guidelines for
developing a sound manure management plan, and for putting the plan into action. It is
the successor to the “Guidelines For The Management and Use of Animal Manure in Nova
Scotia (1991).” This updated document provides more current information on relevant
legislation, nutrient management planning, safety factors, and hauling of manure.

These guidelines do not apply to biosolids, nor should they be used for the purpose of
managing other biological or industrial wastes.

For additional information on hog farms, refer to the publication “Guidelines For Siting and
Management of Hog Farms in Nova Scotia (Revised September 2000).”




                                             3
                                   1. INTRODUCTION

Proper management of manure storage and manure spreading can decrease the potential
for odour generation and environmental pollution. Nova Scotia farmers face increased
numbers of non-farm residents moving to traditional farming communities. Changes in
agriculture have led to fewer farms, but larger farming operations with concentrated
production, increased livestock numbers per farm, imported feed and larger livestock
facilities located on less land. Livestock producers are challenged to enhance some farm
practices, including manure management.

Livestock are inefficient in extracting nutrients from feedstuffs; 75 to 90 per cent of the
major nutrients fed to livestock pass directly through the animal into the manure. Manure
storage is a necessary part of livestock production, since incorporation of manure into the
soil or spreading on fields should only be done at certain times of the year. The extent to
which these nutrients can be returned to the soil and made available to crops depends on
how the manure is stored and handled. It is important to maximize the efficient use of
manure since it is a valuable soil resource.


                              2. STATEMENT OF INTENT

The objectives of these guidelines are:
1.   To recommend management practices that minimize the risk of surface and groundwater
     contamination from livestock manure.
2.   To recommend management practices that minimize complaints of nuisance concerning
     livestock manure.
3.   To promote the effective use of livestock manure as a nutrient source and provide information
     on the limitations of manure as a soil amendment.


                       3. REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS

Improper storage and handling of livestock manure may be cause for legal action. The
three most relevant statutes to be aware of, summarized below, are the Farm Practices Act,
the Environment Act, and the federal Fisheries Act.

The provincial Farm Practices Act (2001) provides a mechanism for the establishment of
normal farm practices, and protects farmers who follow normal farm practices from civil
action in nuisance or negligence. The act provides a fair process to resolve farm practice
complaints between farmers and their neighbours; and enables municipal governments to
apply municipal planning strategies or land-use by-laws to farm land. A “normal farm
practice” is defined in the act. When the Farm Practices Board determines that a farm
practice is not a normal farm practice, the Board may issue an order to modify or cease the
farm practice. Failure to comply with an order would be a violation of this act, and subject
to a fine, imprisonment, or both.


                                                4
The provincial Environment Act (1995) supports and promotes the protection,
enhancement, and prudent use of the environment. Nova Scotians have a responsibility
for stewardship and making efficient use of resources. The act, and regulations, promote
environmental management and encourage due diligence of individuals to prevent
pollution of land, air, and water. Violations may result in a fine, imprisonment, or both.
Actions that result in release of a substance, such as manure, that results in impairment of
water quality, may invoke an order by the Minister of Environment and Labour against an
individual to control or eliminate the release.

Release of a substance into a water course, that is deleterious to fish in any stage of their
life cycle, or that causes harmful damage or destruction to fish habitat may result in
charges being laid by the Department of Fisheries and Oceans (DFO) under the federal
Fisheries Act. In addition to a fine, anyone found guilty under this act may be required to
restore fish habitat, at their own expense.


3.1 Permit Approvals

Prior to construction, any approvals necessary must be obtained from the appropriate
regulatory agencies. Under the National Farm Building Code, a manure storage is defined
as a farm building requiring a design by an engineer to account for such concerns as
loading, reinforced concrete, etc.


                 4. SITING OF MANURE STORAGE FACILITIES

The best site selection for a new manure storage is determined by several factors. As a
measure of due diligence on the part of a landowner, storage facilities should be located to
minimize the risk of surface or groundwater contamination and complaints about
nuisance. Traditionally farms were located close to water courses and over the years these
farms have expanded. In this case proximity to a water course impacts on the design
options available for manure storages . One way to minimize these risks is to establish
minimum separation distances.

Separation distances provide an adequate buffer from water courses, wells and property
lines so that the location of barns or manure storages minimizes the risk of pollution or
nuisance.

Separation distances provided in Table 1 apply to additions or upgrades made to existing
buildings and storages as well as the construction of new facilities. If it is not possible to
meet the recommended separation distances, the distances may vary, if determined by a
qualified engineer, based on a careful site assessment, that the risks of pollution and odour
will not increase.




                                              5
Table 1 - Recommended Minimum Separation Distances for New Livestock Facilities
(excluding hog production units and facilities*)

Public Building                                                                200 m       (660 ft)
Property Line                                                                   50 m       (165 ft)
Existing Off-Farm Dwelling                                                     100 m       (330 ft)
Provincial Highway                                                              50 m       (165 ft)
Off-Farm Well                                                                  100 m       (330 ft)
Lake, River, Brook
    A. Non-contained storage (solid manure)                                    100 m (330 ft)
    B. Fully contained storage (liquid, semi-solid manure)                      50 m (165 ft)
Ditch/Intermittent Stream or Wetland                                            20 m (66 ft)

Note: *   Anaerobic hog lagoons do not seal on the surface like other manure storage types. Therefore, guidelines
          concerning separation distances have been developed specifically for hog facilities. Refer to the publication
          “Guidelines For Siting and Management of Hog Farms in Nova Scotia (Revised September 2000).”


Table 1 serves adjacent landowners as well as the owners of manure storage facilities. That
is, facilities constructed in compliance with the recommended separation distances would
not be expected to relocate in the event that future development may be planning to occur
on adjacent non-agricultural land within the recommended separation distances.

Note that the recommended separation distances may be superseded in regulated areas,
such as a Protected Water Area designated under the Environment Act. This should be
determined beforehand by contacting the municipal office in which the facility is, or will
be, located.


                  5. MANURE STORAGE DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS

Design of livestock manure storages is subject to the latest edition of the Canadian Farm
Building Code. Manure storage construction may require a Building Permit under the Nova
Scotia Building Code Regulation, 1995. Consult a municipal building inspector for
information concerning these codes, and a qualified engineer concerning the design of a
manure storage.

The following four steps should be considered before constructing a manure storage
facility:
•     A system and site evaluation
•     Establishing the size of the storage required
•     Determining the type of storage
•     Getting necessary permits and approvals




                                                              6
5.1 System and Site Evaluation

The design and location of a manure storage facility is influenced by the following
parameters:

5.1.1 Type and Characteristics of Manure

Manure consistency is the primary factor that determines the methods used to collect,
transfer and store manure. Manure is generally classified under the following three
categories: liquid, semi-solid, and solid.

Liquid manure generally has a moisture content of over 95 per cent and has little bedding
material in it. Semi-solid manure has a moisture content between 84 to 95 per cent. Solid
manure has a moisture content less than 84 per cent and has varying amounts of bedding
material in it. It is important to select the proper manure storage system for the type of
manure being produced.

5.1.2 Collection, Transfer and Loading Systems

Several collection, transfer and loading methods are possible. System considerations
include facility type, labour requirements, and overall management system. There is no
single best system; each has advantages and disadvantages. A manure management system
should meet the needs of each individual livestock operation. Consult with an engineer,
manure equipment dealer and other experts early in the project planning to determine the
best system.

Collection options include: barn cleaners, pumps, tractors, mechanical alley scrapers,
slatted floor, gravity flow channels and alley flush. Each of these have specific design
criteria and should be explored. Manure is transferred to a storage by tractor scraping,
gravity flow or pumping. Loading options are usually limited to pumping, tractor loading
and ramp loading. System selection depends on the characteristics of the manure, bedding
practices, type of available labour, elevation of the barn above the storage and storage
system.

5.1.3 Site Conditions

5.1.3.1 Soil Type
Soil type may limit the options available for selecting certain manure storages. Soils that
are well drained affect the design criteria for several types of storage (earthen, open pads,
etc.). The percentage of clay and hydraulic conductivity of the soil will help determine the
type of storage suited for the farm. The underlying geology must also be considered; avoid
gypsum deposits, for example.

5.1.3.2 Topography and Drainage
A manure storage facility should be located on a level site for ease of agitating and loading.
Preventing surface and groundwater from entering a storage is essential. This reduces the
volume of unwanted water and increases the capacity of the storage.

                                              7
5.1.3.3 Wind Direction
When manure is agitated and being loaded, an odour is unavoidable. By considering the
prevailing wind direction, attempts can be made to reduce inconvenience on neighbouring
properties.

5.1.3.4 Aesthetics
Roofs or covers will improve the appearance of manure storages. Consider selecting areas
which keep the storage out of view.


5.2 Storage Volume

Manure production volumes for common livestock can be obtained from standard tables
developed by the American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers. An example is
provided in Table 2. which shows volumes of manure produced by animals which are on
farm for less than one year, as well as, Table 3., which shows daily volumes of manure
produced by some common livestock types. During design, engineers should use all
available resources, which include, but are not limited to the following; Canadian Farm
Building Code, Canadian Farm Buildings Handbook and the ASAE Standards for manure
storage design and volume calculations. Note that the volumes for manure storage may
vary depending on the actual management practices used, e.g. wash water added to the
storage, type and amount of bedding, feeding program, and whether livestock are housed
indoors at all times.



Table 2. Comparison of Manure Production per Animal (Total per finishing period):
Meat producing livestock and poultry.
Animal Type and                        kg/             lb/          liters/          ft3/     Assumed
Production Grouping                 finished        finished       finished       finished    Finishing
                                     animal          animal         animal         animal    Time Period
                                                                                                (days)
Beef – Finishing cattle              4,500           9,800           4,500          160         153
Poultry – Broiler                       4.9             11            4.9          0.17          48
Poultry – Turkey (males)                36              78             36           1.3         133
Poultry – Turkey (females)              17              38             17          0.61         105
Swine – Nursery pig (12.5 kg)           48              87             48           1.4          36
Swine – Grow-finish (70 kg)            560           1200             560            20         120

Data adapted from ASAE D384.2 March 2005, Manure Production and Characteristics




                                                      8
Table 3. Comparison of Manure Production per Animal per Day: Other livestock and
poultry.
Animal Type and                             kg/day/          lb/day/         liters/day/    ft3/day/
Production Grouping                          animal           animal            animal       animal
Beef – Cow (confinement)                        55             121                55          1.94
Beef – Calf (confinement)                       22              50                22          0.81
Dairy – Lactating Cow                           68             150                68          2.40
Dairy – Dry Cow                                 38              83                38          1.30
Dairy – Calf 150 kg                            8.5              19               8.5          0.30
Dairy – Heifer 440 kg                          22               48                22          0.78
Dairy – Veal – 118 kg                         3.5              7.8               3.5          0.12
Layer                                       0.088             0.19            0.088        0.0031
Swine – Gestating Sow – 200 kg                   5              11                 5         0.18
Swine – Lactating Sow – 192 kg                 12               25               12          0.41
Swine – Boar – 200 kg                         3.8              8.4              3.8          0.13

Data adapted from ASAE D384.2 March 2005, Manure Production and Characteristics


Example (A): Liquid manure could be managed using a three-month storage capacity in the
primary facility before transporting it to a satellite storage which has an additional four-
month capacity.

Example (B): A farm operation is considered to be a high-risk situation if its solid manure
storage has less than one month capacity, the manure is spread on frozen ground, and
there is no run-off control provided. The farm can achieve reduced risk of pollution and
odour by utilizing a combined seven-month storage through a manure management plan
incorporating the following options:
a.   controlling run-off from the operation;
b.   constructing a storage pad for the handling and storage of the solid manure for land
     application at a more optimum time of year; and
c.   stockpiling manure in fields where the manure can eventually be spread.


5.3 Types of Storage

Once the site has been selected with all considerations analyzed and the storage volume
determined, the proper manure storage system should be selected. In some circumstances
manure can provide an ideal environment for the production of flies. Various types of
manure storages are described in the following sections.




                                                      9
5.3.1 Liquid Manure Storages
Within Nova Scotia, there are two common methods
of storing liquid manure. These are fully contained
facilities which prevent manure runoff.
     Non-Earthen Liquid Manure Storages (including
     concrete, metal or wooden): must be designed
     and constructed in accordance with the latest
     editions of the National Building Code of Canada
     and the National Farm Building Code of Canada.
                                                        Non-earthen Liquid Manure Storage

                                          Earthen Manure Storages: A qualified engineer
                                          should do the preliminary soil investigation and
                                          design of the storage before any construction
                                          begins.




Earthen Manure Storage


5.3.2 Solid Manure Storages
Solid manure storages are non-contained facilities, so measures are needed to divert roof
water from nearby buildings and surface water drainage away from the manure storage
area. A solid manure storage should be built on a concrete pad or on soil with sufficient
low permeability specified by the design engineer to prevent leaching. Collect run-off
from a solid manure storage or livestock yard in a separate holding structure or a flow-
through treatment system such as a vegetative strip or
constructed wetland. A covered facility would help in
decreasing the amount of run-off from the manure
storage itself.

There are six common methods of storing solid
manure. The method used depends on the facility
design and the type of livestock being raised.

5.3.2.1 Manure Pack
                                                        Concrete Solid Storage
Manure is stored with bedding materials in close
proximity to where it is produced (e.g., when cattle or dairy heifers are raised in a
confined, manure pack housing system or poultry are raised in a solid manure poultry
housing system). This manure is later collected and removed to a separate storage facility,
or stockpiled, or may be applied to land.




                                             10
5.3.2.2 Roofed Storage
Manure is removed from where it is produced to a
covered storage (e.g., in a dairy cow tie-stall barn
where large amounts of bedding materials are used, or
broiler or turkey barns where manure is removed
between batches of birds).


5.3.2.3 Open Manure Storage
                                                                                 Roofed Storage
Manure is removed from where it is
produced (e.g., a tie-stall barn
where manure is removed by a
barn cleaner) to a non-contained
storage such as an open concrete
storage pad.

                                       Solid Storage Concrete Pad

                                       5.3.2.4 Livestock Yard
                                       A livestock yard is classified as a manure storage when
                                       the stocking density exceeds 10 livestock units (see
                                       Section 6) per hectare for a period of one month or
                                       more. As a result, these yards should follow
                                       separation distances recommended in preceding
                                       sections.

Livestock Yard

5.3.2.5 Stockpiling
Stockpiling involves removing the solid manure from
a storage facility and storing it in piles along the edge
of a field where the manure is to be eventually spread
within the current or next growing season. The
storage area requires year-round accessibility. The
separation distances in Section 4 must be followed.
This manure should not be placed over subsurface
drains, very permeable soils, or in flood risk areas.
                                                            Stockpiling
5.3.2.6 Composting
Composting is a manure treatment which can be used to produce a stabilized product that
is free from odour, harmful coliforms, and fly problems. Permits are not required for
manure composting if the manure used in the composting originated on-farm. Otherwise,
an approval is required from the Nova Scotia Department of Environment and Labour for
any composting of materials, which exceeds 60 m3 annually. An approval is also required
if the compost is sold as a commercial activity. The site chosen for a compost pile should
conform to the separation distances described in Section 4. Leachate from the compost


                                               11
should be contained. This can be done if the pile is located near a slight slope with a
receptor pit to catch the run-off. Otherwise, use level land and do not use the same spot
each year. Heavy soil is the best choice as it prevents any leachate from reaching the water
table.

There are a number of composting techniques available including turning a pile, windrow,
and in-cell. Composted manure slowly releases nutrients into the soil and can improve
the biological, chemical, and physical properties of the soil. Frequent turning and
addition of a carbon source (such as wood shavings, straw or sawdust) is essential to
composting. A common source of carbon in Nova Scotia is sawdust and shavings. If
frequent mixing does not occur, the process will become anaerobic.
                                     This condition is usually not reversible and results in
                                     the production of manure gases. The moisture
                                     content of the compost determines if turning is
                                     necessary. Generally, the optimal moisture content
                                     for composting is 50 - 60 per cent, however if the
                                     compost is turned frequently, manure will compost
                                     with a moisture content of up to 75 per cent. The
                                     carbon to nitrogen ratio is very important and should
                                     be in the range of 20:1 to 30:1.
Composting

5.3.3 Satellite Storage
A satellite storage is a liquid manure storage located away from the primary storage facility
and near fields where the manure is to be spread. Satellite storages are for temporary
storage and the manure should be spread within the year.

Advantages:
• Manure can be transported with a truck instead of a tractor.
• The fields closer to the barn do not receive excessive manure application.
• Fields further away will get the nutrients required for crop development.
• The storage provides extra capacity and an option of using smaller spreaders, resulting
   in less soil compaction on fields.

Disadvantages:
• Requires the management of two storage facilities.
• The cost of construction.

The separation distances shown in Table 1, design
considerations described in preceding sections, and
safety factors described in Section 5.4 apply to
satellite storages. Storages should be located on sites
where there is no risk of flooding and where all
surface water drainage can be diverted away from the
storage.
                                                          Satellite storages are for temporary storage
                                                          of manure.


                                              12
5.4 Safety Factors

Precautions must be taken with liquid manure storage to ensure the safety of people and
livestock. A concrete manure storage should be designed in accordance with the latest
editions of the National Building Code of Canada and the National Farm Building Code of
Canada. Safety precautions must be taken to prevent accidental entry into the liquid
manure storage. Some of the most important requirements and information from these
codes and other sources are noted below:
•   A permanent safety fence or wall at least 1.5m (5ft) high should be constructed
    around open liquid storages without fixed covers. Often some liquid storage forms a
    crust at the surface, providing a solid appearance which is dangerously unstable.
•   In the case of covered concrete storages, access opening covers should be locked and
    secured with a safety chain. Steel plates may be used, provided they weigh more than
    23kgs (50 lbs) and require a hook to open. Covers should also have a chain attached
    to prevent the cover from falling into the storage.
•   Ladders shall not be installed in closed liquid manure tanks.
•   Dangerous manure gases can be produced during the breakdown of solids in liquid
    manure. This includes such toxic gases as:
    – Hydrogen Sulfide (H2S) smells like rotten eggs, and is easy to detect at low
      concentrations. However, at high concentrations, it paralyzes the sense of smell
      and gives a person a false sense of security. It is heavier than air and it will
      accumulate at the bottom of the manure tank.
    – Ammonia (NH6) has a sharp pungent odour and irritates the eyes. As a rule, if eye
      irritation occurs, the ventilation in the barn needs to be improved.
    – Methane is the principal gas produced by manure. It is considerably lighter than
      air so it will not accumulate in open tanks.
    – Carbon Dioxide (C02) is colorless and odourless. It is heavier than air and like H2S
      it will accumulate at the bottom of the manure tank. A victim will be affected by
      H2S long before C02.

These gases replace oxygen and cause suffocation. A gas trap between the barn and any
connected long-term manure storage reduces risk of injury. For more information, consult
The Canada Plan Service Fact Sheet M-8710, Manure Gas.
•   Farm owners are required to have a written safety
    procedure for entering a manure storage. Refer to the
    Nova Scotia Occupational Health and Safety Act,
    Occupational Safety General Regulation, Part 12 -
    Confined Space Entry.
•   All access points must have proper safety signs warning
    of the noxious gas hazard.



                                                              Safety Signs are Essential


                                           13
                      6. LAND APPLICATION OF MANURE

Land application of manure on farmland should not be considered in isolation of a plan
for managing all nutrients on the farm. Manure is a valuable source of organic matter as
well as macro soil nutrients such as nitrogen (N), phosphorous (P), potassium (K), calcium
(Ca), sulphur (S), and magnesium (Mg). It is also a source of micronutrients such as boron
(B), copper (Cu), chlorine (Cl), nickel (Ni), cobalt (Co), iron (Fe), manganese (Mn), zinc
(Zn), and molybdenum (Mo). The nutrient value of manure varies depending on the type
of animal and its diet. To obtain maximum benefits for the soil and crop, manure
application rates should be based on a manure analysis, on soil characteristics, and
nutrient requirements of the crop to be grown.

Nutrient management involves the balancing of available soil nutrients, nutrient inputs
from manure, fertilizer, and crops to the amount of nutrients removed by the crop to be
grown. Proper manure management requires the development of a written nutrient
management plan based on soil analyses, manure analysis, spreader calibration and
knowledge of crop inputs and requirements.

Nutrient management planners will recommend changes in cropping practices, types and
amounts of manure to be spread, and figure out a blend and amount of chemical fertilizer
required. Substantial cost savings can occur if a farmer no longer needs phosphorous or
potassium in his chemical fertilizer mix or gives a nutrient value to his manure. Nutrient
management planners can also recommend the time of year when manure should be
spread, so that it is of most benefit to the crop to be grown. A reduction in environmental
risk can occur if manure is spread during the growing season and not in the fall. This is
easier to accomplish if the farmer has a manure storage time in excess of seven months.

The following management practices should be considered in consultation with a nutrient
management plan specialist when using manure as a nutrient source or soil amendment.


6.1 Regular Soil and Manure Testing

The actual amount of manure applied to agricultural land should be determined by testing
both soil and manure for nutrients available in each. For every new crop, it is advisable to
perform a soil test. Soils should be tested every two to three years.

Soil testing is the only reliable way to determine the available nutrient status of a field and
specific fertilizer requirements of a crop. Manure spreading should be avoided on soils that
have excessive phosphorous and potassium readings.

Manure should be tested for nutrient value at least once every three years. Liquid manure
should be sampled after the manure in the storage has been agitated, which creates a more
homogeneous mixture.

Loamy or clay soils have higher nutrient retention capacity and are less permeable.
Therefore, higher rates of manure can be applied to these types of soil. Sandy or gravelly

                                              14
soils tend to have lower nutrient holding capacity and are more prone to leaching. Low
rates of manure (20 per cent) should be applied to these soils to avoid groundwater
contamination. However, these soils can support more frequent applications as long as
maximum rates recommended by a nutrient management planner are not exceeded.

6.2 Manure Application Practices

•    Avoid spreading manure between December 1 and April 1.
•    Avoid applying manure on frozen or snow covered ground. Manure applied under
     these conditions provides little nutrient value and may contribute to surface water
     contamination.
•    Avoid application of manure on excessively wet
     soils.
•    Avoid spreading manure on areas of exposed
     bedrock.
•    Manure should only be applied on land with less
     than 10 per cent slope. A greater degree of due
     diligence is required to prevent run-off losses
     when manure is spread on steeper slopes.
•    All manure spreaders should be calibrated and the
                                                          Manure spreaders should be calibrated and
     spread pattern should be as uniform as possible.     the spread pattern should be as uniform
•    Adhere to the minimum separation distances           as possible.
     shown in Table 4.

Table 4. Minimum Separation Distances for Spreading Manure
        Water Sources                             Separation Distance1
                          2
      Dug or drilled wells                     Clay loam soil       30 m
                                               Sand and gravel      60 m
      Ditches                                                        3m
      Brooks, rivers & lakes                                         5m
1
    These separation distances may be superseded in regulated areas, such as Protected Water Areas
    designated under the Environment Act, or in municipal districts with applicable zoning by-laws.
2
    Surface water flow is to be directed away from wells by a berm located upslope of the well. All
    wells in a pasture shall be fenced with a minimum 3m buffer surrounding the well.



6.3 Land Base Required

A Nutrient Management Plan (NMP) is the only accurate method of determining the
minimum land base requirements for manure utilization. If a farm has a NMP then the
conditions set out in Table 5 do not apply. If the field has excessive nutrients then new
sites may have to be evaluated in the NMP so that manure can be utilized elsewhere.




                                                   15
A Livestock Unit is the number of animals or poultry whose manure production requires
1 hectare (2.5 acres) of available farmland for manure application to ensure minimal risk of
surface or groundwater pollution. An example calculation follows.

Land Base Requirement Calculation
Take the number of animals or poultry of each type on the farm.
Divide by the livestock unit (LU) number in Table 5.
Multiply by 1 (for hectares) or 2.5 (for acres).

EXAMPLE:
Dairy: 60 dairy cows and 50 heifers                   Poultry: 60,000 broiler barn capacity
60 cows ÷ 1.5 dairy cows/LU = 40 LU                   60,000 chickens ÷ 1000 chickens/LU = 60 LU
50 dairy heifers ÷ 2 dairy heifers/LU = 25 LU
60 dairy cows will require:
40 LU x 1 ha = 40 ha or (100 acres)                   60,000 chickens will require:
50 dairy heifers require:                             60 LU x 1 ha = 60 ha or (150 acres)
25 LU x 1 ha = 25 ha (62.5 acres)

This calculation indicates that in total, a minimum of 125 ha (312.5 acres) of available
farmland would be required to effectively use the dairy and poultry manure.

A NMP will accurately determine the minimum land base requirements for this particular
farm or alternatives for manure disposal, taking into account the soil analysis and other
factors outlined above, as well as separation distances shown in Table 4 and other
considerations listed in section 5.3.

Table 5 Animals Required to Equal One Livestock Unit Requiring 1 ha (2.5 acres) of
        Land for Manure Application
         Livestock Type                                          Number of Animals Equivalent to
                                                                      one Livestock Unit
         Dairy Cow                                                            1.5
         Dairy Heifers                                                          2
         Beef Cow                                                               2
         Beef Feeders 150-500 kgs.                                              4
         Sheep                                                                 10
         Sows Breeding/Gestation                                                5
         Sows (Farrow to Finish includes all feeder pigs belonging to sow)      1
         Sows (Farrow to Wean)                                                  4
         Weaners                                                               50
         Hogs (Feeders)                                                        10
         Laying Hens                                                          500
         Broiler Chickens - barn capacity                                    1000
         Turkey Broilers (5 kg) - barn capacity                               300
         Mink                                                                 200
         Veal Calves                                                           25


                                                     16
                       7. MANURE ODOUR MANAGEMENT
In Nova Scotia, manure odours account for 50 per cent of all environmental complaints
related to agriculture. There are three common sources of odours: barn, storage and field
application. Sensitivity to odour varies from person to person. As a consequence, it is
extremely difficult to establish acceptable thresholds for odours.

Odours originate from livestock manure as a result of a broad range of odour-producing
compounds. Complaints most often occur because of hydrogen sulphide odours (a rotten
egg smell) and ammonia (a sharp pungent odour). Most offensive odors are created by the
anaerobic decay of manure.

Periodic release of manure odours does happen, but measures can be taken to minimize
the occurrence.

7.1 Ventilation Systems

Proper indoor air quality in the barn is a necessity to maintain the health and productivity
of both the farm workers and the animals. Ventilation is required in livestock buildings to
remove moisture, gasses, dust and excess heat produced by animals. Fresh air inlets are the
most important part of the ventilation system since they control most of the distribution
and mixing of air. If the inlet is not working properly, poor air distribution with uneven
temperatures and drafts will occur. Cold, damp, foul smelling buildings are usually caused
by: lack of insulation in walls and ceilings, absence of or incorrectly installed inlets, lack of
a vapor barrier, fans that are not working properly, the barn is not filled to capacity or is
too full, or lack of artificial heat. It is recommended that ventilation systems be designed
by a qualified engineer.


7.2 Roofs or Covers

Some liquid manures do not develop a crust which will seal the surface and prevent
anaerobic gases from escaping. These gasses produce odour. Roofs or covers can reduce
odours by 90 per cent.


7.3 Manure Handling and Spreading

Spreading manure on land should be done when the crop condition is suitable for nutrient
use and soil conditions are suitable to avoid run-off to surface waters. The best time to
spread, to minimize odour problems, is on a sunny, windy day. However, the best time to
spread to limit ammonia loss is on a humid day. It is preferable to have manure spread in
the early fall instead of late fall as the manure is more valuable to a crop and there is less
chance of compaction of the soil and run-off. Wherever feasible incorporate manure
within 48 hours of land application. Manure that is incorporated can decrease ammonia
losses by 50 per cent. Direct incorporation is not practical on untilled land. Toolbars on
the back of spreaders decrease losses by 25 per cent.

                                               17
                  8. MANURE TRANSPORTATION GUIDELINES

Farm vehicles, when operating on highways, are regulated by the Nova Scotia Motor
Vehicle Act. While operating on a highway, the Act states, “every commercial motor vehicle
or combination of motor vehicle and trailer shall have a body so constructed as to be securely
attached to the vehicle and be strong enough to assure that the load will not shift or fall from the
vehicle.” All vehicles transporting loosely packed bulk materials or liquid or semi-liquid
materials shall be constructed in such a manner so as to prevent the contents from
dropping, shifting, leaking or otherwise escaping from the vehicle. Avoid overloading
manure spreaders.

All farm tractors must display a slow moving emblem. A trailer or manure spreader being
hauled by a farm tractor must display a slow moving triangle as well.

Further information and recommendations regarding the hauling of manure is available in
the pamphlet published by Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada referenced in Section 9.


                                       9. REFERENCES
     Canada Plan Service, Manure Gas, Fact Sheet M-8710, 1985
     Nova Scotia Department of Agriculture and Marketing, Siting and Management of Hog
     Farms in Nova Scotia, 2000
     Nova Scotia Farm and Health and Safety Committee, Standards of Practice for Farms in
     Nova Scotia, 2000
     Nova Scotia Farm Practices Act, 2000
     Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Transportation Guidelines for Nova Scotia Farmers,
     1998
     ASAE (American Society of Agricultural Engineers) Standards Guidelines, 2005
     Nova Scotia Department of Agriculture and Fisheries, Integrated Fly Management Fact
     Sheet for Livestock Farms, 2005
     Nova Scotia Department of Agriculture and Marketing, Constructed Wetlands for the
     Treatment of Agricultural Wastewater in Atlantic Canada, 1998




                                                 18
                                       10. Glossary

anaerobic - biological breakdown of manure           permeable soils - sands and gravels
without the presence of oxygen
                                                     pollution - in relation to surface water or
composting - a designed and managed                  groundwater, means the presence in the
system to facilitate the process of aerobic          water of substances or contaminants that
decomposition of organic matter by                   are foreign to or in excess of the natural
biological action                                    constituents of the water, or that
                                                     adversely affects the uses of the water
ditch - an excavated channel for the
purpose of draining water                            public building - a church, hospital,
                                                     school, government or municipal
earthen manure storage - a structure built
                                                     building or a place such as a museum or
primarily from soil, constructed by
                                                     park, which is open daily for public
excavating a hole in the ground with spoil
                                                     access
used to form dikes, and used to retain liquid
and semi-solid livestock manure                      qualified engineer - a person who has all
                                                     of the following qualifications:
facility - barns and manure storage,
including additions                                  (a) has education, training, knowledge
                                                         and experience in agricultural systems
highway -
                                                     (b) is registered by the Association of
(a) a public highway, street, lane, road, alley,
                                                         Professional Engineers of Nova Scotia
    park, beach, or place including bridges
                                                         (APENS)
    thereon, and
                                                     (c) has insurance to cover liability
(b) private property that is designed to be
    and is accessible to the general public for      run-off - water which flows over the
    operation of a motor vehicle                     surface of the land after a rainfall event or
                                                     snow melt
intermittent stream - a stream which is
normally dry at least four months of the year        satellite storage - a liquid manure storage
                                                     which is located away from the main
lake, river, brook - a body of water that
                                                     farm and close to fields where the liquid
continuously has a flow of water and aquatic
                                                     manure is to be spread
life
                                                     semi-solid manure - livestock manure
liquid manure - livestock manure that
                                                     that generally has a moisture content
generally has a moisture content of over 95
                                                     between 84 to 95 per cent
per cent
                                                     solid manure - livestock manure that has
livestock - animals or poultry not kept
                                                     a moisture content less than 84 per cent
exclusively as pets, excluding bees
                                                     and has varying amounts of bedding
livestock facility - a combination of                material incorporated in it
building housing livestock and required
                                                     stockpiling - storing manure from a solid
manure storages
                                                     storage along the edge of a field where
livestock units - the number of animals              the manure will eventually be spread
whose manure production requires 1 ha (2.5
                                                     well - a hole, drilled or dug into the
acres) of available land for spreading to
                                                     ground for the purpose of obtaining
ensure minimal risk of surface or
                                                     groundwater for consumption
groundwater pollution



                                                19
