                             PLEASE NOTE
This document, prepared by the Legislative Counsel Office, is an office
consolidation of this regulation, current to March 13, 2010. It is intended for
information and reference purposes only.

This document is not the official version of these regulations. The regulations and
the amendments printed in the Royal Gazette should be consulted to determine the
authoritative text of these regulations.

For more information concerning the history of these regulations, please see the
Table of Regulations.

If you find any errors or omissions in this consolidation, please contact:

                            Legislative Counsel Office
                               Tel: (902) 368-4291
                           Email: legislation@gov.pe.ca
                           CHAPTER N-2

              NATURAL AREAS PROTECTION ACT

                            REGULATIONS

Pursuant to section 7 of the Natural Areas Protection Act R.S.P.E.I.
1988, Cap. N-2 Council made the following regulations:

1. In these regulations                                                       Definitions

    (a) “Act” means the Natural Areas Protection Act;                         Act

    (b) “management plan” means a plan approved by the Minister for           management plan
    the management of a natural area;
    (c) “natural area” means land that has been designated as such by         natural area
    order of the Minister pursuant to section 3 of the Act;
    (d) “owner” means the person in whom a natural area is legally            owner
    vested. (EC54/89)
2. The purpose of creating natural areas is to conserve for posterity the     Purpose
aesthetic, scenic and natural character and condition of ecosystems, and
to prevent their exploitation for commercial purposes. (EC54/89)
3. (1) Within or upon a natural area, no person shall engage in or permit     Activities
any of the following activities:                                              prohibited in
                                                                              natural area
     (a) cutting, destroying or removing of trees, shrubs or other
     vegetation;
     (b) planting or otherwise introducing non-native plant or animal
     species;
     (c) operating snowmobiles, dune buggies, motorcycles, all-terrain
     vehicles or any other motor vehicles;
     (d) creating, constructing or paving roads or other rights-of-way,
     driveways, docks, landing strips or parking lots;
     (e) erecting or constructing buildings, signs, fences or structures of
     any kind;
     (f) dumping, filling, excavating, mining, drilling, dredging or
     otherwise adding or removing topsoil, loam, gravel, sand, rock,
     minerals, gas or petroleum products or other surface or sub-surface
     material of any kind;
     (g) constructing drainage ditches, dams, retaining walls,
     transmission towers and lines, pipelines or other undertaking which
     affects the topography of the land.



                                    1
2                     Cap. N-2                 Natural Areas Protection Act           Updated 2010
                                                       Regulations


Exception, activity     (2) The Minister may authorize the person responsible for the
pursuant to           management of any natural area to engage in an activity prohibited by
management plan
                      subsection (1) if satisfied that such activity is necessary for the proper
                      management of the area pursuant to a management plan. (EC54/89;
                      132/06)
Exception, activity   3.1 (1) The Lieutenant Governor in Council may, in writing, authorize
pursuant to           the person responsible for the management of any natural area to engage
authorization
                      in an activity prohibited by subsection 3(1) if the Lieutenant Governor in
                      Council is satisfied that such activity is necessary in the public interest.
Terms and               (2) Terms and conditions may be attached
conditions                (a) by the Minister to an authorization issued under subsection 3(2);
                          and
                          (b) by the Lieutenant Governor in Council to an authorization issued
                          under subsection (1).
Repeal                  (3) This section is repealed on April 1, 2006. (EC132/06)
Permit such an        3.2 (1) Notwithstanding subsection 3(1) and subject to subsection (3)
activity              and (4), a person may engage in an activity prohibited by subsection 3(1)
                      in respect of a natural area, or permit such an activity, if
                           (a) a valid authorization, issued under subsection 3(2) or 3.1(1), is
                           held by the person responsible for the management of the natural
                           area; and
                           (b) the activity is carried out in accordance with the terms and
                           conditions, if any, set out in the authorization.
Effect of repeal        (2) For greater certainty, the repeal of section 3.1 does not effect the
                      validity of an authorization issued under that section or the continued
                      application of the terms and conditions attached to an authorization
                      under that section.
Revocation              (3) The Minister may revoke an authorization issued to a person under
                      subsection 3(2) where the Minister is satisfied that the person has
                      contravened a condition attached to the authorization.
Idem                    (4) The Lieutenant Governor in Council may revoke an authorization
                      to a person issued under subsection 3.1(1) where the Lieutenant
                      Governor in Council is satisfied that the person has contravened a
                      condition attached to the authorization. (EC132/06)
Alienation of         4. No person shall convey any interest in a natural area or portion
interest in natural   thereof, whether by way of grant, deed, mortgage, lease, license,
area
                      easement, right-of-way or otherwise, without first obtaining the written
                      consent of the Minister. (EC54/89)



                                                            2
Updated 2010             Natural Areas Protection Act              Cap. N-2                        3
                                 Regulations


5. Where any of the activities set out in subsection 3(1) have occurred       Report
within or upon a natural area without the permission or participation of
the owner, upon learning of the occurrence, the owner shall report to the
Minister the occurrence and the particulars thereof. (EC54/89)
6. (1) The Minister may cause an identifying plaque or other notice to be     Identifying plaque
erected upon a natural area.
  (2) The Minister or any person authorized by the Minister may, at any       Powers of entry
time, enter upon a natural area for the purpose of inspection or
enforcement of the Act or the regulations but may not enter structures or
buildings in the natural area. (EC54/89)
7. (1) Any person who violates these regulations is guilty of an offence      Offence and
and is liable upon summary conviction to a fine not exceeding $1,000,         restitution

and upon conviction the judge may order that person to pay such
restitution as the judge thinks fit to any person aggrieved by the
violation.
  (2) Where a violation of these regulations continues for more than one      Continuing offence
day, the offender is guilty of a separate offence for each day that the
violation continues.
  (3) Proceedings in respect to an offence under these regulations may        Limitation period
be instituted at any time within two years after the time when the subject    for prosecution

matter of the proceedings arose. (EC54/89)
8. (1) A violation of these regulations may be restrained by injunction at    Injunction
the instance of the Minister upon application to the Supreme Court, and
the court shall grant the injunction upon being satisfied that the granting
of the injunction is advisable to ensure compliance with these
regulations.
  (2) An injunction granted pursuant to subsection (1) may be                 Form of injunction
prohibitive or mandatory in nature, and, where mandatory, may require
the taking of action to restore the natural area affected by the violation.
(EC54/89)
9. The restrictions herein on the use of natural areas are in addition to     Saving for other
any such restrictions established or set out in any restrictive covenants,    restrictions

easements, leases, licenses or other documents or agreements with
respect to any natural area. (EC54/89)
10. A conservation officer appointed under the Wildlife Conservation Act      Conservation
R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap. W-4.1 has the power and authority to enforce the        officer may enforce
                                                                              Act
Act and these regulations. (EC137/10)




                                      3
