                         PLEASE NOTE
This document, prepared by the Legislative Counsel Office, is an office
consolidation of this Act, current to March 13, 2010. It is intended for
information and reference purposes only.

This document is not the official version of the Act. The Act and the
amendments as printed under the authority of the Queen’s Printer for the
province should be consulted to determine the authoritative statement of the
law.

For more information concerning the history of this Act, please see the
Table of Public Acts.

If you find any errors or omissions in this consolidation, please contact:

                         Legislative Counsel Office
                            Tel: (902) 368-4291
                        Email: legislation@gov.pe.ca
                           CHAPTER N-2

                 NATURAL AREAS PROTECTION ACT


1. In this Act                                                                Definitions

    (a) “Minister” means the Minister of Environment, Energy and              Minister
    Forestry;
    (b) “natural area” means a parcel of land designated as such under        natural area
    section 3 that
       (i) contains natural ecosystems or constitutes the habitat of rare,
       endangered or uncommon plant or animal species,
       (ii) contains unusual botanical, zoological, geological,
       morphological or palaeontological features,
       (iii) exhibits exceptional and diversified scenery,
       (iv) provides haven for seasonal concentrations of birds and
       animals, or
       (v) provides opportunities for scientific and educational programs
       in aspects of the natural environment. 1988, c.46, s.1; 1989(2nd),
       c.1, s.2; 1993, c.29, s.4; 1997,c.20,s.3; 2000,c.5,s.3;
       2004,c.36,s.3; 2009,c.73,s.2.
2. The object of this Act is to preserve natural areas in the province.       Object
1988, c.46, s.2.
3. (1) The Minister may, by order, designate any area of land as a natural    Designation of
area if                                                                       natural areas

     (a) the land is Crown land;
     (b) the Minister has entered into an agreement pursuant to section 4
     with a private landowner for the purchase, lease or acquisition of the
     land; or
     (c) a private landowner has registered a restrictive covenant
     affecting the land pursuant to section 5.
   (2) The designation of any area as a natural area does not confer any      Rights not
right to use land within the natural area which a person would not have       conferred by
                                                                              designation
in the absence of the designation.
  (3) The Minister may, by order, revoke all or part of a designation         Removal of
made under subsection (1) in respect of the area or a part of the area of     designation

land to which the designation applies where the Minister is satisfied that
    (a) either
       (i) natural processes have significantly diminished, impaired or
       eliminated the plant or animal species, features, scenery, havens
       or opportunities referred to in subclauses 1(b)(i) to (v) for which


                                    1
2                   Cap. N-2                 Natural Areas Protection Act



                           the area or part of the area of land was designated as a natural
                           area, or
                           (ii) the interests of the community or region in which the natural
                           area is located are better served by removing the designation and
                           allowing the use of the land for development or other purposes;
                           and
                        (b) the land to which the designation applies is Crown land.
Public notice and     (4) No order respecting a designation shall be made under subsection
consultation        (1) or (3) with respect to Crown land unless the Minister has first
                         (a) published a notice in the Gazette and other media
                            (i) indicating the intention to make an order designating or
                            revoking the designation of an area of land or part of an area of
                            land as a natural area, and
                            (ii) inviting public representations on the matter within the period
                            specified in the notice of no less than two weeks; and
                         (b) considered any public representations received within the period
                         specified in the notice. 1988, c.46, s.3; 2005,c.13,s.1.
Agreements          4. (1) A private landowner who wishes to have his land designated as a
                    natural area may enter into an agreement with the Minister for the
                    purchase, lease or acquisition of the land by the government.
Terms re              (2) An agreement under subsection (1) shall set out the terms and
management          conditions under which the land will be managed as a natural area. 1988,
                    c.46, s.4.
Restrictive         5. (1) Without prejudice to section 4, a private landowner may impose a
covenant            restrictive covenant on his or her land by entering into an agreement with
                    the Minister or with any other person.
Elements of           (2) A restrictive covenant pursuant to subsection (1) may
covenant                (a) be positive or negative in nature;
                        (b) declare that such uses of the land as may be specified therein are
                        forfeited;
                        (c) be registered as a deed under the Registry Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988, R-
                        10, and, where so registered, it
                           (i) shall run with the land and be binding on the land-owner and
                           his or her successors in title, and
                           (ii) may be enforced, by injunction, by either party to the
                           agreement mentioned in subsection (1), against a party to the
                           covenant and his or her successors in title to the land,
                        even where the person seeking to enforce the covenant owns no
                        other land which would be accommodated or benefited by the
                        covenant. 1992, c.50, s.1.



                                                          2
                         Natural Areas Protection Act              Cap. N-2                   3



6. (1) The Minister may appoint an Advisory Committee to advise him           Advisory
on the designation and management of natural areas.                           Committee


  (2) Members of the Committee shall receive such expense allowances          Expense allowances
as the Lieutenant Governor in Council may determine. 1988, c.46, s.6.
7. The Lieutenant Governor in Council, on the recommendation of the           Regulations
Minister, may make regulations
    (a) with respect to the designation of land as a natural area;
    (b) defining the objectives, purpose and function of a natural area;
    (c) regulating activities that may take place in a natural area;
    (d) respecting the management and protection of natural areas;
    (e) respecting any other matter incidental to the protection of natural
    areas;
    (f) creating offences with respect to activities in a natural area and
    prescribing penalties therefore; and
    (g) respecting the persons or officers, or classes of persons or
    officers, who have the power and authority to enforce the
    regulations; and
    (h) respecting the powers and duties of persons or officers who
    enforce the regulations. 1988, c.46, s.7; 2006,c.16,s.63(9.1).




                                      3
