                         PLEASE NOTE
This document, prepared by the Legislative Counsel Office, is an office
consolidation of this Act, current to May 19, 2010. It is intended for
information and reference purposes only.

This document is not the official version of the Act. The Act and the
amendments as printed under the authority of the Queen’s Printer for the
province should be consulted to determine the authoritative statement of the
law.

For more information concerning the history of this Act, please see the
Table of Public Acts.

If you find any errors or omissions in this consolidation, please contact:

                         Legislative Counsel Office
                            Tel: (902) 368-4291
                        Email: legislation@gov.pe.ca
                           CHAPTER O-5

                   OIL AND NATURAL GAS ACT


                               PART I
                          INTERPRETATION
1. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires                          Definitions

    (a) “approved” means approved by the Minister or Chief Officer;           approved

    (a.1) “Chief Officer” means a person appointed by the Minister to         Chief Officer
    supervise the observance of the provisions of this Act and
    regulations made under it;
    (b) “commercial production” in reference to the output of a well,         commercial
    shall be deemed to be such quantity of oil, or natural gas, which         production

    after considering the cost of drilling, completion and production
    operations, the quantity of production and availability of markets,
    would, in the opinion of the Minister, economically warrant the
    drilling of a like well in the immediate area;
    (b.1) “Crown land” means any land vested in the Crown;                    Crown land

    (c) “enter and use” means the act of a permittee, or lessee, his or       enter and use
    their servants, agents and contractors of entering into and upon and
    using any portion of the lands of any person within the province for
    the purpose of exploring and of making surveys and examinations,
    using water and of opening, boring, drilling, excavating, laying,
    erecting or building derricks, wells, slush pits, pumps, powers,
    surface rods, pipe lines, tanks, roads, works, drains, and other
    related installations and of doing all the acts or things authorized;
    (c.1) “field” means                                                       field
       (i) the surface area or areas underlaid or appearing to be underlaid
       by one or more pools, and
       (ii) the subsurface regions vertically beneath that or those surface
       areas;
    (d) “gas-oil ratio” means the ration of the number of standard cubic      gas-oil ratio
    feet of natural gas produced to the number of barrels of oil
    produced;
    (d.1) “geophysical equipment” means equipment used for or in              geophysical
    connection with or preparatory to geophysical exploration;                equipment

    (e) “geophysical exploration” means the investigation of the              geophysical
    subsurface by                                                             exploration




                                     1
2                      Cap. O-5                   Oil and Natural Gas Act



                              (i) seismic operations,
                              (ii) gravimetric operations,
                              (iii) magnetic operations,
                              (iv) electric operations,
                              (v) geochemical operations,
                              (vi) test-hole drilling, and
                              (vii) any other method approved by the Minister;
geophysical license        (e.1) “geophysical license” means a license as defined in section 25;
grid area                  (f) repealed by 1999,c.38,s.1;
holder of a location       (f.1) “holder of a location” means, in accordance with the context,
                              (i) a permittee,
                              (ii) a lessee;
lease                      (g) “lease” means a valid and subsisting lease issued under this Act;
lessee                     (g.1) “lessee” means any person deriving title through a lease of the
                           Crown;
location                   (h) “location” means the area described in
                              (i) a permit, or
                              (ii) a lease;
Minister                   (h.1) “Minister” means the Minister of the Crown for the time being
                           charged by the Lieutenant Governor in Council with the
                           administration of this Act;
natural gas                (i) “natural gas” means all fluid hydrocarbons, both before and after
                           processing, which are not defined as oil, and includes hydrogen
                           sulphide contained therein;
office                     (i.1) “office” means the office of the Minister at Charlottetown;
oil                        (j) “oil” means crude oil and other hydro-carbons, regardless of
                           gravity, which are or can be recovered from a pool in liquid form
                           through a well by ordinary production methods;
permit                     (k) “permit” means a valid and subsisting permit issued under this
                           Act;
permittee                  (l) “permittee” means any person deriving title through a permit of
                           the Crown;
person                     (m) “person” includes a body corporate;
pipe-line                  (n) “pipe-line” for the purpose of this Act, includes pipe or system
                           or arrangement of pipes wholly within the Province of Prince
                           Edward Island by which oil or natural gas, or water used or obtained
                           in or by drilling for or the production of oil or natural gas, is


                                                            2
                       Oil and Natural Gas Act                  Cap. O-5                        3



conveyed, and includes real or personal property used for the
purpose of, in connection with, or incidental to the operation thereof,
including off shore installations and vessels, but does not include a
pipe or system or arrangement of pipes for distribution of natural gas
within a community to ultimate consumers;
(o) “pool” means an underground reservoir containing an                    pool
accumulation of oil or natural gas, or both, separated or appearing to
be separated from any other reservoir or accumulation;
(p) “provincial lands” means the land mass of Prince Edward Island         provincial lands
and includes the seabed and subsoil off the shore of the land mass to
the limits of Prince Edward Island sovereignty and to such limits as
may be set by federal-provincial agreement;
(q) repealed by 1999,c.38,s.1;                                             section

(r) “shot-hole” means a hole drilled for the purpose of firing an          shot-hole
explosive charge in connection with seismic operations;
(s) “spacing area” means the drainage area defined by regulations,         spacing area
for or allocated by the regulations to a well for the purpose of
drilling for and producing oil or natural gas, and includes at all
depths the subsurface areas bounded by the vertical planes in which
the surface boundaries lie;
(t) “test-hole” means a hole, other than a seismic shot-hole, drilled or   test-hole
being drilled to a depth not exceeding two thousand feet for the
purpose of obtaining geological or geophysical information;
(u) repealed by 1999,c.38,s.1;                                             unit

(v) “unitized operation” means                                             unitized operation
   (i) the development or production of oil and natural gas, or
   (ii) the implementing of a program for the conservation of oil and
   of natural gas or the coordinated management of interests in the
   oil and natural gas within, upon, or under a location, part of a
   location, or a number of locations that are combined for that
   purpose pursuant to a unitization agreement entered into under
   this Act;
(w) “waste” in addition to its ordinary meaning, means “waste” as          waste
that term is understood in the oil and natural gas industry, and
includes the underground or surface loss of potentially recoverable
oil or natural gas and wasteful operations;
(x) “wasteful operations” include                                          wasteful operations
   (i) the locating, spacing, drilling, equipping, completing,
   operating, or producing of a well in a manner that results or tends


                                 3
4      Cap. O-5                   Oil and Natural Gas Act



              to result in reducing the quantity of oil or natural gas ultimately
              recoverable from a pool by the use of sound engineering practices
              and economic principles,
              (ii) the locating, drilling, equipping, completing, operating, or
              producing of a well in a manner that causes or tends to cause
              excessive surface loss or destruction of oil or natural gas,
              (iii) the inefficient, excessive or improper use or dissipation of
              reservoir energy however caused,
              (iv) the failure to use suitable and timely artificial, secondary, or
              supplementary recovery methods in a pool where it appears
              probable, on the basis of available information, that any of the
              methods would result in increasing the quantity of oil or natural
              gas ultimately recoverable from a pool by the use of sound
              engineering practices and economic principles,
              (v) the escape or flairing of natural gas if it appears that, in the
              public interest and by the use of sound engineering practices and
              in the light of economics and the risk factor involved, the natural
              gas could be gathered, processed if necessary, and it or the
              products therefrom marketed, stored for future marketing, or
              beneficially injected into an underground reservoir,
              (vi) the inefficient or improper storage of oil or natural gas on the
              surface or underground,
              (vii) the production of oil or natural gas in excess of the quantity
              that can be properly stored, transported, or marketed, and
              (viii) the use of natural gas for purposes other than gas lift,
              repressuring, recycling, pressure maintenance, or for fuel or
              electrical requirements, unless the use is efficient and in the
              public interest;
well       (y) “well” means a hole
              (i) made or being made by drilling, boring, or in any other manner
              from which any oil or gas is obtained or obtainable, or for the
              purpose of obtaining oil or natural gas,
              (ii) used, drilled, or being drilled for the purpose of obtaining
              water for injection or for injecting natural gas, air, water, or any
              other substance into an underground formation, or
              (iii) used, drilled, or being drilled to a depth in excess of two
              thousand feet for the purpose of obtaining geological or
              geophysical information;
zone       (z) “zone” means a stratum or strata designated by the Minister as a
           zone either generally or in respect of a designated area or a specific
           well or wells. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.2; 1999,c.38,s.1 {eff.}
           Nov. 14/00.




                                            4
                           Oil and Natural Gas Act                  Cap. O-5                         5



                            PART II
                    GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
2. For the purpose of this Act, in the expressions “oil and natural gas”       “Oil and gas”
and “oil or natural gas” the word “and” includes “or” and the word “or”        “Oil or gas”

includes “and”. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.4.
3. All oil and natural gas whatsoever within and under the provincial          All oil and natural
lands was and is vested in Her Majesty the Queen in right of the               gas property of
                                                                               Crown
province, notwithstanding any grant of mines or minerals heretofore
made in or by any Crown Grant or in or by an other deed or conveyance
heretofore executed nor by whom the lands containing such oil and
natural gas are held in the manner in which they were acquired, and,
notwithstanding any other law, oil and natural gas, or any right in
relation thereto, shall not be capable of alienation except as in this Act
provided, and every grant hereafter made by the Crown shall be
construed and held to reserve all oil and natural gas in the lands so
granted. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.5; 1999,c.38,s.2 {eff.} Nov. 14/00.
4. (1) Notwithstanding section 3 or any other provision of this Act, the       Alienation to
Lieutenant Governor in Council may alienate its rights referred to in          Crown federal

section 3 to Her Majesty the Queen in right of Canada, and in any
transfers of use and possession of provincial lands to Her Majesty the
Queen in right of Canada under this Act, or outside this Act, the
Lieutenant Governor in Council may transfer the rights of Her Majesty
the Queen in right of the province under section 3 and the administration,
benefit and control of such provincial lands to Her Majesty the Queen in
right of Canada for the establishment or development of National Parks,
National Historic Parks and National Historic Sites.
  (2) The provincial lands upon and after a transfer referred to in            Application of Act
subsection (1) cease to be subject to this Act unless such transfers           after alienation

otherwise provide.
  (3) A transfer referred to in subsection (1) may be made subject to          Terms and
such terms, conditions and reservations as the Lieutenant Governor in          conditions of
                                                                               transfer
Council may consider advisable. 1976, c.1, s.1.
5. A permittee or lessee under Part I of this Act shall have no right to any   Entitlement to
minerals as defined in the Mineral Resources Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap.         minerals

M-7 within the area covered by his permit or lease. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap.
O-3, s.6.
6. If in the exploration for, or development or production of, oil or          Notice to Minister
natural gas, a mineral as defined in the Mineral Resources Act, or other       if minerals
                                                                               discovered
valuable substance or deposit, is discovered, the permittee or lessee, as



                                     5
6                      Cap. O-5                    Oil and Natural Gas Act



                       the case may be, shall immediately notify the Minister. R.S.P.E.I. 1974,
                       Cap. O-3, s.7.
Permit, lease, or      7. (1) No person shall explore for oil or natural gas unless he has a valid
license required       and subsisting permit, lease or geophysical license issued under this Act.
Drill well, permit       (2) No person shall drill any well unless he has a valid and subsisting
                       permit or lease issued under this part. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.8.
Inspections of sites   8. At any reasonable time, persons authorized by the Minister
& records                  (a) shall have access to all wells, equipment, plants, and records;
                           (b) are entitled to enter upon and inspect any well or any place at
                           which oil or natural gas is refined, handled, processed, or treated, or
                           any place used or occupied in connection with a well or with a place
                           at which oil or natural gas is refined, handled, processed, or treated;
                           (c) are entitled to inspect all books, documents, records, plant, and
                           equipment pertaining to any such well, or place, or found thereon;
                           and
                           (d) are entitled to take samples or particulars or to carry out any tests
                           or examinations desired. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.9.
Identification card,   9. A person authorized by the Minister to exercise any of the powers
production of          referred to in section 8 shall, prior to exercising any of such powers,
                       produce on demand his identification card signed by the Minister.
                       R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.10.
Prohibitions           10. No member of the department responsible for the administration and
                       enforcement of this Act and the regulations drawn pursuant to it, and no
                       person employed continuously by the department shall have a monetary
                       interest of any description, directly or indirectly, in any oil or natural gas
                       property in the province or in any business engaged in any phase of the
                       oil and natural gas industry and carried on in the province, other than
                       shares of a company that are regularly quoted and dealt in on a
                       recognized stock exchange. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.11.
Regulations            11. The Lieutenant Governor in Council may make regulations
                           (a) respecting the disposal of drill cuttings, muds, waste products or
                           any noxious or deleterious substances upon any lands or into any
                           waters;
                           (b) respecting the restoration, reclamation and rehabilitation of lands
                           used for oil and natural gas exploration and production;
                           (c) governing the operation of any production facilities including
                           any well, wellhead equipment, processing equipment or place where
                           crude oil and natural gas are extracted and processed;
                           (d) providing for the carrying out of the operations referred to in
                           clause (c) in a safe and efficient manner;


                                                             6
                           Oil and Natural Gas Act                 Cap. O-5                        7



    (e) requiring from the holder of an oil and natural gas permit or
    lease, statements and plans respecting work and operations;
    (f) defining the kind and quantities of work acceptable and the
    manner and form in which such work shall be submitted;
    (g) establishing the boundaries of oil and natural gas lands;
    (h) governing the survey of an oil and natural gas permit or lease;
    (i) prescribing forms and providing for their use;
    (j) prescribing fees, rentals and deposits payable under this Act;
    (k) respecting educational and training programs in the skills
    required by persons engaged in the exploration for, drilling or
    production of, oil or natural gas;
    (l) respecting investment in research and development programs in
    the province by producers of oil or natural gas;
    (m) for the prevention of discrimination against persons habitually
    resident in the province in employment or in the supply of goods and
    services required in operations for the exploration for, drilling or
    production of, oil or natural gas;
    (n) prescribing interest rates; and
    (o) for the better carrying out of the provisions of this Act. 1978,
    c.16, s.5; 1981, c.24, s.1.

                               PART III
                           RIGHT OF ENTRY
12. Crown lands may be entered upon and explored for oil and natural          Entry on Crown
gas with the consent of the Minister upon such terms and conditions as        lands

he may prescribe. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.12.
13. No permittee, lessee or geophysical licensee shall enter and use any      Permission to
private lands for the purpose of exploring for oil and natural gas or         explore on private
                                                                              lands
drilling wells, or for the doing of any other act thereon until he has
obtained the right to enter and use the same either
     (a) by agreement with the owner, tenant or occupant of the lands; or
     (b) by obtaining a special order from the Minister under this Act.
     R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.13.
14. (1) A permittee, lessee, or geophysical licensee who is unable to         No agreement to
make an agreement with the owner, tenant or occupant of private lands         enter with owner,
                                                                              where
for the right to enter and use the lands covered by his permit or lease, or
any part thereof, may apply to the Minister, after notice to the owner,
tenant, or occupant, for a special order to enter and use such lands.
  (2) Upon the receipt of an application and of evidence that copies of       Hearing application
the application have been served and delivered as required by this Act,
the Minister shall fix a date for the hearing of the application, which
shall not be later than twenty-one clear days after all copies of the


                                     7
8                     Cap. O-5                   Oil and Natural Gas Act



                      application have been served and delivered, and may require the
                      applicant to give such notice of the hearing in such manner and to such
                      persons as the Minister may direct.
Date for hearing        (3) After hearing the parties the Minister may grant such special order
Ministerial order     upon such terms and conditions as he may think proper, and may
                      determine the amount of compensation to be paid to such owner, tenant
                      or occupant and the manner and time of payment of the same.
Security for            (4) The Minister may order the giving of security for payment of the
payment of            compensation and may prohibit, pending the determination of the
compensation
                      proceeding or until the compensation is paid or secured, further entry or
                      use by the permittee, lessee, geophysical licensee, or any person claiming
                      under him.
Substituted service     (5) Where there are several owners, tenants or occupants of the lands
                      sought to be entered and used and there are in the opinion of the
                      Minister, special difficulties in effecting service of any notice under this
                      section, the Minister may order substituted service in such manner as he
                      may determine.
No appeal from          (6) There shall be no appeal from the granting by the Minister of such
Ministerial order     special order nor from his determination as to the amount of
                      compensation, nor from any order for security, nor from any order or
                      decision, or ruling in respect thereto, except to a judge of the Supreme
                      Court upon matters of law only. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.14; 1975,
                      c.27, s.5.
Minister may order    15. The Minister may order arbitration under the terms of this Act of the
arbitration           amount of compensation to be paid by the permittee, lessee or
                      geophysical licensee, for any damage to the lands and premises entered
                      into or upon or used under the authority of the Minister as aforesaid.
                      R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.15.
Notice to be served   16. If the Minister directs that any damages shall be determined by
to appoint            arbitration, the permittee, lessee, or geophysical licensee shall serve
arbitrators
                      notice to the owner, tenant or such person as the Minister directs to
                      appoint an arbitrator within thirty days from the service of the notice to
                      act with another arbitrator named by the permittee, lessee, or geophysical
                      licensee in order to determine the amount of compensation for damages
                      aforesaid to which the owner and tenant shall be entitled by reason of the
                      doing of any of the acts or things authorized and contemplated by this
                      Act. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.16.
Service of notice
                      17. (1) The notice mentioned in section 16 shall, when practicable, be
                      personally served on such owner, or his agent and tenant, of any of the
                      said lands; if, after reasonable efforts have been made to effect such


                                                           8
                           Oil and Natural Gas Act                  Cap. O-5                        9



personal service, the service cannot be effected, then the notice may be
served by leaving it at the last known place of abode of the owner, or his
agent or tenant.
  (2) If the owner resides in the county in which the land is situated, the    Idem
notice shall be served within ten days of the order of the Minister; if out
of the county and within the province, twenty days; and if out of the
province, thirty days.
  (3) If the owner and tenant both refuse, omit or decline to appoint an       Appointment of
arbitrator, or when for any other reason no arbitrator is appointed by the     arbitrator

owner or tenant in the time limited after service of the notice, a judge of
the Supreme Court shall, on being satisfied by affidavit that such notice
has come to the knowledge of the owner, agent, or tenant, or that the
owner or agent or tenant wilfully evades service of the notice or cannot
be found, and that reasonable effort has been made to effect such service,
and that notice was left at the last known place of abode of such owner,
or agent, or tenant, appoint an arbitrator on his behalf.
   (4) One arbitrator only shall be appointed by the owner and tenant; and     Appointment of
if they do not agree in the choice of an arbitrator, the one chosen by the     arbitrator

owner shall be entitled to act. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.17.
18. (1) All arbitrators appointed under the authority of this Act shall be     Duties and powers
sworn before a judge or a justice to the faithful discharge of the duties      of arbitrators

assigned them; and they shall forthwith proceed to estimate the
reasonable damages which the owners and tenants of the lands,
according to their several interests therein, shall respectively sustain by
reason of the entry and use of such lands and of the occupation of so
much of the land (how much to be determined by an officer appointed by
the Minister in the event of any dispute arising in respect thereto) as the
permittee, lessee, or geophysical licensee may require for all working
purposes connected with the exploration for and development of oil and
natural gas and the transportation of same to the most advantage thereof,
including all such spaces as may be necessary from time to time for
dumping ground or grounds, for depositing waste, refuse, rubbish and
other material excavated by such permittee, lessee or geophysical
licensee.
  (2) In estimating the damages the arbitrators shall determine the value      Estimating damages
of the land irrespective of any enhancement thereof from the existence of
minerals, oil or gas therein.
                                                                               Selection of third
  (3) In case the arbitrators cannot agree they may select a third             arbitrator
arbitrator; and when the two arbitrators cannot agree upon a third
arbitrator, a judge of the Supreme Court shall select such third arbitrator.


                                     9
10                 Cap. O-5                   Oil and Natural Gas Act



                     (4) The award of any two arbitrators made in writing shall be final.
Award final
                   R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.18.
Where owner is a   19. In case the owner or tenant is a minor, or mentally incompetent
minor, mentally    person, or other person under disability, a judge of the Supreme Court
incompetent or
under disability   shall on application appoint two indifferent persons as arbitrators; and all
                   further proceedings shall be in accordance with the provisions of this
                   Act; and all moneys awarded in such case shall be paid to the
                   Prothonotary. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.19; 2008,c.20,s.72(67).
Procedure where    20. When the owner of such land shall be unknown or uncertain, the
owner is unknown   permittee, lessee, or geophysical licensee, shall, by advertisement
or uncertain
                   published in the Gazette for three weeks and in two daily newspapers
                   published in the province, for at least once a week for three weeks and in
                   which advertisement the lands shall be particularly described, call upon
                   all persons having a right to such damages to appear before a judge of
                   the Supreme Court, on or before a certain day therein named, to be not
                   less than twenty days after the publication of such advertisement, to
                   appoint an arbitrator, and if an arbitrator is not appointed on or before
                   such day the said judge of the Supreme Court and the permittee, lessee,
                   or geophysical licensee, shall each appoint an arbitrator, and all further
                   proceedings shall be in accordance with the provisions of this Act; and
                   all moneys awarded in such case shall be paid to the Prothonotary, and
                   when the right of ownership of the land shall be in dispute, the payment
                   for damages awarded shall be in like manner paid to the Prothonotary.
                   R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.20; 2008,c.20,s.72(67).
Payment of         21. Payment of such damages by the party liable therefor to the person
damages under      designated by the award as entitled thereto or payment into any court as
award
                   in this Act provided shall discharge the party making payment; but any
                   person subsequently claiming to have been entitled to the damages so
                   paid may prosecute his claim by action for money had and received
                   against persons to whom the payment shall have been made. In case the
                   award shall not designate to whom the money is to be paid or in case the
                   party designated shall decline to receive it, the party liable to the
                   payment of the amount so ordered may exonerate himself from all further
                   liability by paying the money so ordered to the Prothonotary. R.S.P.E.I.
                   1974, Cap. O-3, s.21; 2008,c.20,s.72(67).
Disputed or        22. In case of disputed or unknown title a judge of the Supreme Court,
unknown title      on application, may order the damages paid into court, and in such case
                   and in all other cases where money or damages awarded are paid into
                   court under the provisions of this Act, the said moneys and damages
                   shall be paid to the person who shall establish his right thereto, to the
                   satisfaction of a judge of the Supreme Court; but no order shall be made
                   until sufficient notice has been given in the judgment of a judge of the


                                                        10
                            Oil and Natural Gas Act                  Cap. O-5                         11



Supreme Court to protect the rights of all persons who may be or who
may claim to be interested. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.22.
23. The permittee, lessee, or geophysical licensee shall not be implicated      Parties to the suit
nor shall he be made a party, in any contestation between the parties,
respecting the right to the damages. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.23.
24. In no case in which the award shall find the amount of damages with         Error in name of
sufficient certainty shall such award be set aside because persons entitled     person entitled to
                                                                                damages
to damages are not designated by name, or otherwise sufficiently
designated, or by reason of error or irregularity as to the persons entitled,
or on account of any matter of form; but a judge of the Supreme Court
may rectify any error or informality and may adopt such proceedings as
may be considered advisable for determining to whom the damages may
be paid, or for otherwise carrying into effect the provisions and intent of
this Act. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.24.

                           PART IV
                   GEOPHYSICAL EXPLORATION
25. (1) No person, on his own behalf or for or on behalf of others, shall       Geophysical
undertake geophysical exploration unless he is the holder of a subsisting       licenses

geophysical license.
 (2) An application for a geophysical license shall be made to the Chief        Application for
Officer in the prescribed form.                                                 license


  (3) On receipt of an application, the Chief Officer, upon approval of         Issue of license
the Minister, may issue a geophysical license upon payment of the
prescribed fee.
  (4) A geophysical license shall terminate one year following the date         Determination of
of issue. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.25; 1978, c.16, s.6; 1999,c.38,s.3       license

{eff.} Nov. 14/00.
26. A geophysical license is not transferable except in cases of corporate      Transfer of license
merger, amalgamation, or succession, and then only with the written
consent of the Minister. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.26.
27. (1) The Minister may cancel a geophysical license for failure of the        Cancellation of
holder to comply with any provisions of this Act or the regulations.            license

                                                                                Notice before
   (2) Except where a condition exists that in the opinion of the Minister      cancellation
is a danger to any person or to public or private property, the Minister
shall not cancel a geophysical license under subsection (1) until he has
given the holder thirty days notice, or such longer time as he considers




                                      11
12                     Cap. O-5                   Oil and Natural Gas Act



                       advisable, to rectify the default and such default is not rectified within
                       the notice period. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.27.
Regulations            28. The Lieutenant Governor in Council may from time to time make
                       regulations
                           (a) governing the methods and manner and places in which
                           geophysical exploration may be carried out; and
                           (b) providing for reports or returns that must be given the Chief
                           Officer from time to time. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.28.
Rights conferred by    29. (1) Subject to subsection (2) and to section 25, the permittee has the
permits                exclusive right to do geological work and geophysical exploration work
                       and exploratory drilling for oil or natural gas or both, within the
                       boundaries of the location of the permit.
                            (2) Repealed by 1999,c.38,s.4.
Activities
Interference with        (3) Repealed by 1999,c.38,s.4. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.29; 1999,
permittee              c.38,s.4 {eff.} Nov. 14/00.

                                                      PART V
                                                  SURVEY SYSTEM
Identification and     30. The manner and system by which areas are identified and described
description of areas   with respect to geophysical licenses, permits and leases for the purposes
                       of this Act shall be as prescribed by the regulations. 1999,c.38,s.5 {eff.}
                       Nov. 14/00.
Minister may grant     31. (1) Subject to this section, the Minister may grant permits in
permits                accordance with the regulations.
Prior bids               (2) A permit shall not be granted pursuant to this section unless there
                       has been a call for bids for the permit area and acceptance of a bid, in
                       accordance with the regulations.
Permit, if any,          (3) Notwithstanding subsection (1) the Minister shall not grant a
within 6 months        permit more than 6 months after the closing date for a call for bids
                       respecting an area.
Where no permit          (4) Where subsection (3) applies, there shall be deemed to have been
granted                no call for bids under this section with respect to the area.
Permit term, etc.        (5) A permit shall be for the term, and on the terms and conditions as
                       prescribed by the regulations. 1999,c.38,s.7 {eff.} Nov. 14/00.
Revocation of
permit                 32. The Minister may revoke a permit in accordance with the regulations.
                       1999,c.38,s.7 {eff.} Nov. 14/00.




                                                            12
                           Oil and Natural Gas Act                 Cap. O-5                     13



33. The permitee shall, to the satisfaction of the Minister, comply with
                                                                              Permitee to comply
and fulfil all the terms and conditions of the permit and do or cause to be   with permit
done on the area for which the permit was granted, the work set out in
the permit, including but not limited to, geological work, geophysical
exploration, exploration drilling and such other activities as may be
prescribed by the regulations. 1999,c.38,s.7 {eff.} Nov. 14/00.
34. All work pursuant to the permit shall be recorded with the Chief          Work to be
Officer in accordance with the regulations. 1999,c.38,s.7 {eff.} Nov.         recorded with Chief
                                                                              Officer
14/00.
35. (1) The Minister may require a permitee to provide security for the       Security
performance of its obligations under this Act and the regulations.
  (2) The security provided by the permitee under this section may be         Forfeiture of
forfeit to the Minister in accordance with the regulations. 1999,c.38,s.7     security

{eff.} Nov. 14/00.
36. A permitee shall not allow commencement of the drilling of a well in      Drilling prohibited
the permit area within the prescribed distance of an existing well in any     within prescribed
                                                                              distance from other
area. 1999,c.38,s.7 {eff.} Nov. 14/00.                                        well

37. Except as provided in section 94, no permitee shall produce any oil       No production
or natural gas from a well unless the permitee has a valid lease, granted     without lease

pursuant to this Act, for the area on which the well is located.
1999,c.38,s.7 {eff.} Nov. 14/00.
38. (1) A permitee may, at the end of any permit term, surrender all or       Surrender of permit
any portion of the area included in the permit, upon giving notice in         area or portion of it

writing to the Minister.
  (2) Notwithstanding the surrender of a permit or any part of a permit or    Continuing liability
the revocation of a permit, the permitee and the surety of the permitee
remain liable for any act, matter or thing for which they would be liable
as a permitee under this Act and the regulations. 1999,c.38,s.7 {eff.} Nov.
14/00.

                            PART VI.1
                    TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
39. (1) Subject to the regulations and to subsection (2), on the date this    Permit prior to
Part comes into force, a permit valid immediately prior to that date shall    coming into force

remain valid for the balance of the term of the permit and any renewals
thereof to which the permitee would have been entitled as of March
30,1999.




                                     13
14                     Cap. O-5                   Oil and Natural Gas Act



                         (2) For the avoidance of doubt, a permitee under this section shall not
No additional
privileges
                       gain any rights or privileges under this Act, without otherwise complying
                       with all of the provisions of this Act. 1999,c.38,s.8 {eff.} Nov. 14/00.
                       Sections 40 to 42 repealed by 1999,c.38,s.6 {eff.} Nov. 14/00.
Application for        43. A permittee when drilling a well discovers oil or natural gas in
lease upon             commercial quantity, when instructed by the Minister to do so, shall
production of oil or
natural gas            apply for a lease, the location of which is to include the well-site on or
                       before a date set by the Minister, which shall not be earlier than three
                       months after the date of the instruction. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.44.

                                                       PART VII
                                                       LEASES
Right of permitee to   44. (1) The Minister shall grant a lease to a permitee who complies with
lease                  subsection (2), in accordance with the regulations.
Idem                     (2) A permitee who has made full compliance with the provisions of
                       Part VI and has complied with and fulfilled all of the terms and
                       conditions of the permit, has the exclusive right to receive a grant of
                       lease from the Minister, covering the area specified in the permit.
Term of lease            (3) A lease granted under this section shall be for the prescribed term.
                       1999,c.38,s.9 {eff.} Nov. 14/00.
Exclusive rights to    45. The lessee has the exclusive right to produce, or cause to be
produce                produced from the lease oil and natural gas. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3,
                       s.46.
Termination of         46. The issuance of a lease, by that very fact, terminates the validity of
permit                 any permit with respect to the lease. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.47.
Application for        47. Application for a lease shall be made in the prescribed form to the
lease                  Chief Officer and shall be accompanied by the prescribed fee and rental.
                       R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.48.
                       Sections 48 to 55 repealed by 1999,c.38,s.10 {eff.} Nov. 14/00.
Expiry of lease        56. (1) Except as otherwise provided in this Act, every lease expires at
                       the end of the term stated.
Renewal of lease         (2) A lease upon the location of which is developed a commercial well
                       shall be renewed upon the expiration of the lease for a further term and
                       for such intervals while in production, as may be prescribed by the
                       regulations.




                                                            14
                            Oil and Natural Gas Act                  Cap. O-5                      15



  (3) Where the drilling or working of a well is commenced on the               Continuation of
location of a lease before the expiration of the term, the term of the lease    lease for well
                                                                                drilling
continues so long as the drilling or working is being conducted to the
satisfaction of the Minister.
  (4) Where the well referred to in subsection (3) is completed as a            Renewal
commercial well, the lease shall be renewed under subsection (2).
  (5) Where, during the period that a lease is continued under subsection       Abandonment of
(3), the well is abandoned, the term of the lease continues for a further       well, continuation
                                                                                of lease
period of ninety days from the date of the abandonment; and if the
drilling of another well in the location is commenced before the
expiration of the ninety day period, the term of the lease is further
continued during the period that drilling is being conducted to the
satisfaction of the Minister; and if the well is completed as a commercial
well, the lease shall be renewed under subsection (2).
  (6) The Minister may, upon application by a lessee, increase the period       Increase in period
of ninety days referred to in subsection (5) where a lessee has been
prevented from drilling a well as required in that subsection by
extraordinary physical conditions which are completely beyond any
control and could not be foreseen by the lessee.
   (7) The rental payable from the period during which the term of a lease      Prorating rental
is continued under this section shall be prorated.
  (8) The Minister may at any time, except during the three years next          Drilling notice
following the issue of a lease, order the lessee to commence and continue
the drilling of a well to the satisfaction of the Minister within ninety days
from the date of the order.
  (9) Where a well has been                                                     Further drilling
    (a) abandoned; or                                                           notice

    (b) completed and has not been declared capable of producing in a
    commercial quantity,
the Minister may at any time, except during the year following the date
of abandonment or completion, order the lessee to commence and
continue the drilling of another well to the satisfaction of the Minister
within ninety days from the date of order.
  (10) Repealed by 1999,c.38,s.11 {eff.} Nov. 14/00.                            Extension of
                                                                                permits
  (11) Where a lessee violates any provision of this section, the Minister,     Violations and
in addition to any other penalties provided for in this Act, may give           cancellations of
                                                                                leases
written notice to the lessee and unless the lessee remedies or prepares to
remedy the violation, to the satisfaction of the Minister within ninety
days from the date of the notice, the Minister may cancel the oil or gas


                                      15
16                   Cap. O-5                   Oil and Natural Gas Act



                     lease. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.58; 1978, c.16, s.15; 1999,c.38,s.11
                     {eff.} Nov. 14/00.
Extension with       57. Where a commercial well has not been developed, the term of a lease
penalty              may be extended upon payment of the prescribed rental and penalty.
                     R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.59; 1978, c.16, s.16; 1999,c.38,s.12 {eff.}
                     Nov. 14/00.
Expiry date          58. Subject to sections 59 and 60, where a lessee fails to pay the rental
                     the lease expires by that very fact, at the end of the first anniversary of
                     the day upon which the rental was payable unless, on or before that
                     anniversary
                          (a) he pays the rental and does the work, if there has been default in
                          both payment of the rental and the doing of the work; and
                          (b) he pays, in addition, a penalty in a sum equal to one-tenth of the
                          rental and the value of the work not done. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3,
                          s.60.
Rental in advance    59. Repealed by 1999,c.38,s.13 {eff.} Nov. 14/00.
Conditions for       60. Application for renewal of a lease shall be made to the Chief Officer
renewal of leases    and renewal thereof shall not be granted unless
                         (a) the application is received by the Chief Officer prior to the
                         expiration of the lease; and
                         (b) there is set forth therein the name of a commercial well
                         developed on the location,
                     and the lease shall not be renewed until the prescribed fee and rental
                     have been paid. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.62; 1978, c.16, s.17.
Pooling of leases    61. (1) Where two or more lessees have locations within a spacing area,
                     or part of a spacing area, the lessees may pool their locations for the
                     development and operation or the operation of the spacing area; and the
                     Minister may enter into a pooling agreement on behalf of Her Majesty in
                     right of the province on such terms and conditions as he considers
                     advisable, which agreement may, without limiting the generality of the
                     foregoing, be made subject to the provisions of subsection (7).
Application to         (2) In the absence of a pooling agreement under subsection (1), a
Minister for order   lessee who is the holder of a lease within, or partly within a spacing area,
to pool
                     may apply to the Minister for an order directing the lessees who hold
                     locations within, or partly within the spacing area, to pool those portions
                     of the leases within the spacing area for the purposes of drilling and
                     producing, or drilling or producing petroleum and natural gas, or either
                     of them, from the spacing area.
Hearing, before
order to pool         (3) Upon receipt of an application made under subsection (2), the
                     Minister shall hold a hearing, or cause a hearing to be held by a person or


                                                          16
                           Oil and Natural Gas Act                  Cap. O-5                       17



persons named by him and according to procedure that he may authorize,
and at the hearing all interested parties shall be given an opportunity to
be heard.
  (4) Subsequent to the hearing, the Minister may order the leases or          Order for leases to
portions thereof affected to be developed and operated or operated upon        be developed

the terms and conditions set out in the order.
  (5) The Minister shall provide in every order under subsection (4) for       Order to provide
    (a) drilling and operation of a well on the spacing area, or, where a
    well that is capable of or could be made capable of production has
    been drilled on the spacing area before the making of the order, for
    the operation of the well;
    (b) the appointment of a person (hereinafter called the “operator”) to
    be responsible for the drilling, operation, or abandonment of the
    well, whether drilled before or after the order;
    (c) the allocation to each lessee of the lessee’s share of the oil and
    natural gas from the spacing area, which allocation shall be as
    prescribed unless it can be shown that such basis is inequitable in the
    circumstances;
    (d) in the event that no production of oil or natural gas is obtained,
    for the payment by the applicant of all costs incurred in the drilling
    and abandonment of the well;
    (e) where production has been obtained, for the payment of the
    actual costs of drilling the well, whether drilled before or after the
    making of the order, and for the payment of the actual costs of the
    operation and abandonment of the well, together with a penalty not
    exceeding one-half of the lessee's share of the actual cost of drilling
    and completion, payable to the operator by a lessee who does not
    pay the other costs attributable to him by a date specified in the
    order; and
    (f) for the sale by the operator of any oil and natural gas allocated to
    a lessee under clause (c) where the owner thereof does not take or
    dispose of such production, and for the deduction to be made by the
    operator out of the proceeds.
  (6) The share of the costs of the drilling, operating and abandonment        Share of costs
of the well and penalty (if any) is recoverable only out of a lessee's share   recoverable from

of production from the spacing area if payment is not made by him by
the time specified in the order.
  (7) Where a pooling order has been made or the Minister has entered          Effect of pooling
into a pooling agreement under subsection (1)                                  order

     (a) the drilling for or the production of oil or natural gas from the
     spacing area and all operations incidental thereto shall for all
     purposes be deemed to be carried on or conducted by the several


                                     17
18                    Cap. O-5                   Oil and Natural Gas Act



                          lessees respectively upon their separately owned leases in the
                          spacing area; and
                          (b) that portion of the allowable production allocated to each lessee
                          shall be deemed to have been produced by a well drilled on the lease
                          of which the lessee is the holder. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.63;
                          1999,c.38,s.14 {eff.} Nov. 14/00.

                                                     Part VII.1
                                                    ROYALTIES
Royalties reserved    62. (1) Royalty is reserved to Her Majesty in right of the province on oil
to the province       and natural gas and sulphur obtained by processing natural gas, any or all
                      of which are obtained from any permit or lease acquired under this Act,
                      in such amount and is payable in such manner as may from time to time
                      be prescribed by the Lieutenant Governor in Council, but the amount
                      thereof shall not be less than that payable immediately before the coming
                      into effect of this Act.
Failure to comply       (2) Every holder of a location who fails to comply with subsection (1)
with subsection (1)   commits an offence and is liable to the payment of the penalty prescribed
                      by regulation. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.64; 1981, c.24, s.2.
Deductions when       63. (1) Deductions that may be allowed when computing the royalty on
computing royalty     petroleum and natural gas, other than crude oil, for the costs, charges and
                      expenses incurred in gathering or processing shall be the deductions
                      specified by the Minister.
Agreements              (2) Notwithstanding section 62, the Lieutenant Governor in Council
establishing          may authorize the Minister to enter into an agreement establishing the
royalites
                      amount of royalty to be paid and the method of calculating the royalty,
                      on oil and natural gas produced from a unitized operation, or as the result
                      of a conservation plan, scheme, or project, including, but not limited to,
                      injection or pressurization schemes. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.65.

                                                   PART VIII
                                                CROWN RESERVES
Crown reserves of     64. The following oil and natural gas is reserved to Her Majesty in right
oil and natural gas   of the province;
                           (a) all oil and natural gas within a permit area that does not become
                           included in a lease area;
                           (b) all oil and natural gas in cancelled, reverted, abandoned or
                           surrendered permits or lease areas; and
                           (c) oil and natural gas in whatever areas may from time to time be
                           designated by regulations. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.66.



                                                           18
                           Oil and Natural Gas Act                  Cap. O-5                      19



65. (1) The Minister may dispose of the Crown reserves of oil and
                                                                               Disposal of Crown
natural gas under such terms and conditions as are approved by the             reserves
Lieutenant Governor in Council.
  (2) Nothing in Part VI or VII shall apply to a disposition of Crown          Application of Parts
reserves under subsection (1). R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.67; 1980,          VI & VII

c.39, s.1; 1981, c.24, s.3.

                              PART IX
                           CONSERVATION
66. (1) This Part applies to every well situated in the province whenever      Application of
drilled.                                                                       division


  (2) No person shall commence to drill, or drill or operate a well except     Well authorization,
in accordance with a valid and subsisting well authorization. R.S.P.E.I.       required

1974, Cap. O-3, s.68.
67. An application for a well authorization shall be made to the Chief         Applications for
Officer, and is not valid unless                                               authorization

    (a) it is accompanied by the prescribed fee and drilling deposit or
    such greater amount as may be required by the Minister where, in
    his opinion, special circumstances exist;
    (b) it is made in accordance with this Act and regulations;
    (c) the applicant is entitled as the lessee of the lease area upon which
    the well is to be drilled, or by agreement with the lessee, to drill the
    well for which the authorization is applied for and to produce oil or
    natural gas, or both, through the well;
    (d) there is set forth therein the number or other accurate
    identification of the area held by the applicant within which the well
    is to be drilled and, when an agreement exists, a letter of consent
    from the lessee; and
    (e) there is set forth therein a program of drilling operations
    proposed to be followed pursuant to the authorization. R.S.P.E.I.
    1974, Cap. O-3, s.69; 1978, c.16, s.18.
68. A well authorization may be cancelled by the Minister                      Cancellation
    (a) where the drilling of the well for which the authorization was
    issued is not commenced within one year of the day upon which the
    authorization was issued;
    (b) at the request of the person to whom the authorization was
    issued;
    (c) where it appears to the Minister that there has been a
    contravention of this Act or any regulation or order made hereunder
    with respect to the well for which the authorization was issued;



                                     19
20                   Cap. O-5                    Oil and Natural Gas Act



                         (d) where the Chief Officer has mailed to the person to whom the
                         authorization was issued a notice in writing requiring that person to
                         prove to the satisfaction of the Minister he is entitled to drill the well
                         for which the authorization was issued and to extract oil or natural
                         gas, or both, through the well, and the person has not, on or before
                         the thirtieth day after the day upon which the notice was mailed,
                         complied with the requirements set forth in the notice; or
                         (e) where the Minister is satisfied that the holder thereof is not
                         entitled as a lessee or by agreement with the lessee to drill the well
                         for which the authorization was issued, or to extract oil or natural
                         gas, or both, through the well, whether or not a notice as mentioned
                         in clause (d) has been mailed. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.70.
Suspension of a      69. The Minister may suspend a well authorization for a definite time or
well autorization    indefinitely where he is satisfied that a contravention of this Act or any
                     regulation or order made hereunder has occurred with respect to the well
                     for which the authorization was granted. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.71.
Suspension of a      70. A well authorization held by a person who is not entitled as a lessee,
well authorization   or by agreement with a lessee to drill the well for which the authorization
                     was granted or to produce oil or natural gas, or both, through the well is
                     null and void for all purposes, except that the person remains liable to
                     complete or abandon any well or suspend operations in accordance with
                     directions that may be given by the Minister. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3,
                     s.72.
Test hole            71. No person shall commence to drill or drill a test-hole except in
authorization        accordance with a valid and subsisting test hole authorization issued
                     under this Act. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.73.
Application for      72. Application for a test-hole authorization shall be made to the Chief
                     Officer and is not valid unless
                         (a) it is accompanied by the prescribed fee;
                         (b) it is in accordance with this Act and the regulations;
                         (c) the applicant is the holder of a valid and subsisting geophysical
                         license;
                         (d) there is set forth therein a statement showing
                            (i) the maximum number of test-holes proposed,
                            (ii) the areas in which the test-holes are proposed to be drilled,
                            (iii) the approximate depth of the test-holes, and
                            (iv) the formation, stratum, or zone in which the drilling is to
                            terminate; and
                         (e) there is set forth therein a program of drilling operations
                         proposed to be followed pursuant to the authorization. R.S.P.E.I.
                         1974, Cap. O-3, s.74; 1978, c.16, s.19.



                                                           20
                           Oil and Natural Gas Act                 Cap. O-5                       21



73. A test-hole authorization may be cancelled by the Minister
                                                                              Cancellation
    (a) where the drilling of the test-holes for which the authorization is
    issued is not commenced within six months of the day upon which
    the authorization was issued;
    (b) at the request of the person to whom the authorization was
    issued;
    (c) where it appears to the Minister that a contravention of this Act
    or any regulation or order made hereunder has occurred with respect
    to any test-hole for which authorization was issued; or
    (d) if the geophysical license expires. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3,
    s.75.
74. The Minister may suspend a test-hole authorization for a definite         Suspension of a
time or indefinitely where he is satisfied that a contravention of this Act   test-hole
                                                                              authorization
or of any regulation, or order made hereunder has occurred with respect
to any test-hole for which the authorization was issued. R.S.P.E.I. 1974,
Cap. O-3, s.76.
75. (1) No person shall operate a drilling rig, or service rig, except in     Rig license
accordance with a valid and subsisting rig license issued under this Act.
  (2) A rig license shall terminate one year from the date of issue           Termination of
thereof. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.77.                                     license


76. Application for a rig license shall be made to the Chief Officer and is   Application for
not valid unless                                                              license

     (a) it is accompanied by the prescribed fee;
     (b) it is made in accordance with this Act and the regulations.
     R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.78; 1978, c.16, s.20.
77. A rig license may be cancelled by the Minister                            Cancellation
    (a) at the request of the person to whom the license was issued; or
    (b) where it appears to the Minister that a contravention of this Act
    or of any regulation or order made hereunder has occurred with
    respect to the rig for which the license was issued. R.S.P.E.I. 1974,
    Cap. O-3, s.79.
78. The Minister may suspend a rig license for a definite time or             Suspension of rig
indefinitely where he is satisfied that a contravention of this Act, or of    license

any regulation or order made hereunder has occurred with respect to the
rig for which the license was issued. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.80.
79. (1) The Minister or the Chief Officer authorized by him to do so          Granting or refusing
may, in his discretion, grant, subject to conditions, restrictions, and       well authorization

stipulations, or refuse to grant a well authorization, test-hole
authorization, or a rig license.



                                     21
22                    Cap. O-5                   Oil and Natural Gas Act



                        (2) The Chief Officer shall keep a record of each well authorization,
Record of well
authorization
                      test-hole authorization and rig license issued. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3,
                      s.81.
Transfer of           80. (1) A well authorization, test-hole authorization or rig license shall
authorization         not be transferred unless
                           (a) the Minister has consented to the transfer in writing;
                           (b) the document that is the evidence of the transfer is filed with the
                           Chief Officer; and
                           (c) the fee prescribed by regulation has been paid to the Chief
                           Officer.
Record of transfers    (2) The Chief Officer shall keep a record of every transfer to which the
                      Minister has given consent. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.82.
Well Register         81. The Chief Officer shall maintain a record of each well drilled, to be
                      known as the “Well Register” and in which shall be entered with respect
                      to each well
                           (a) the name given to the well, any changes made thereto, and the
                           location of the well;
                           (b) the well authorization number;
                           (c) the name of the person to whom the well authorization was
                           issued or transferred and his agents; and
                           (d) the name of the drilling contractor or contractors. R.S.P.E.I.
                           1974, Cap. O-3, s.83.
Regulations and       82. The Lieutenant Governor in Council may make regulations or special
special orders        orders governing the drilling of wells and the production and
                      conservation of oil and natural gas and, without limiting the generality of
                      the foregoing, may
                           (a.0) prescribe the manner and system by which areas are identified
                           and described with respect to geophysical licenses, permits and
                           leases;
                           (a) prescribe normal spacing areas for oil and natural gas wells;
                           (b) prescribe other than normal spacing areas in any field, pool, or
                           other area;
                           (c) prohibit the drilling of a well at any point within a prescribed
                           distance of any boundary roadway, right-of-way, building of any
                           specified type; or any specified works, either public or private;
                           (d) prescribe and describe the part of a spacing area within which a
                           well is to be completed, and provide penalties for and prohibitions
                           against completing the well in other parts of the spacing area;
                           (e) require the submission of an application and the obtaining of the
                           approval of the Minister before
                              (i) deepening a well beyond the formation from which production
                              is being taken or has been taken,


                                                           22
                       Oil and Natural Gas Act                  Cap. O-5   23



    (ii) recompleting a well by perforating any casing with a view to
    producing from any formation other than that from which
    production is being taken or has been taken,
    (iii) suspending normal drilling operations,
    (iv) suspending normal producing operations for a period longer
    than three consecutive months,
    (v) resuming drilling operations after a previous completion,
    suspension, or abandonment of a well,
    (vi) resuming producing operations after a previous suspension,
    (vii) reworking a well to alter the producing characteristics of the
    well, or
    (viii) abandoning a well,
and authorizing the Minister to prescribe the conditions under which
approval is granted in any such case, and prescribing the methods to
be employed in any drilling or abandonment operations;
(f) prescribe the conditions under which drilling operations may be
carried out in water-covered areas, and any special measures to be
taken in such operations;
(g) prescribe the measures to be adopted to confine any oil, natural
gas, or water encountered during drilling operations to its original
stratum, and to protect the contents of the stratum from infiltration,
inundation, and migration;
(h) prescribe the minimum standards of tools, casing, equipment,
and materials that may be used for drilling, development, and
production of oil or natural gas;
(i) govern the drilling of multi-zone wells, prohibit completion of a
well as a multi-zone well without the permission of the Minister,
prohibit the use of a well for the production from or injection to
more than one zone without the approval of the Minister, and
authorize the Minister to prescribe the terms and conditions under
which he grants his approval in any such case;
(j) prohibit the drilling through oil, natural gas, water, coal or other
minerals without taking adequate measures to confine oil, natural
gas, or water to its own stratum, and to protect any coal seam or
other mineral deposit or any workings therein from injury, and
prescribe the nature and extent of such measures;
(k) require the provision of adequate well casing and the proper
anchorage and cementation thereof;
(l) require and prescribe the taking and method of taking samples of
any kind and their submission to the Minister;
(m) require and prescribe any tests, analyses, surveys and logs and
the obtaining of other necessary information and the submission of
all such records and information to the Minister;




                                 23
24   Cap. O-5                  Oil and Natural Gas Act



         (n) prescribe the measures to be taken before the commencement of
         drilling and during drilling and production to conserve any oil,
         natural gas or water likely to be encountered;
         (o) prescribe or limit the methods of operation to be observed during
         drilling and in the subsequent management of any well and the
         conduct of any operation for any purpose, including, without
         restricting the generality of the foregoing
             (i) the protection of life and property,
             (ii) the prevention and extinguishment of fires,
             (iii) the prevention of wells flowing out of control, and
             (iv) the prevention of pollution of water;
         (p) regulate the location and equipping of production batteries;
         (q) regulate the conditioning or reconditioning of wells by
         mechanical, chemical, or explosive means;
         (r) regulate the inspection of wells both during and after drilling;
         (s) provide for the capping or otherwise closing in of wells for the
         purpose of preventing waste;
         (t) prescribe the conditions under which the Minister or the Chief
         Officer may order the suspension of drilling or producing operations
         at a well;
         (u) require the cleaning-out of any wells;
         (v) regulate the unitization of a pool or field for the purpose of
         drilling and producing;
         (w) prescribe records that must be maintained and filed with the
         Chief Officer;
         (x) regulate the release of well records and well data;
         (y) regulate the naming of wells and batteries;
         (z) regulate general conservation of oil and natural gas, the waste or
         improvident disposition thereof, and any other matter incidental to
         the development and drilling of oil and natural gas wells, the
         operation thereof, and the production therefrom;
         (z.1) establish a tariff of fees for well authorizations, test-hole
         authorizations, and rig licenses, the transfer of same, well name
         changes, and for such other purposes as may be required; and
         (z.2) establish the amount and disposition of drilling or other
         deposits required under this Act;
         (z.3) regulate all aspects of licenses granted pursuant to this Act;
         (z.4) regulate all aspects of permits granted pursuant to this Act,
         including permits governed by section 39;
         (z.5) regulate all aspects of leases granted pursuant to this Act
         (z.6) prescribe a bidding system under this Act;
         (z.7) prescribing forms for the purposes of this Act. R.S.P.E.I. 1974,
         Cap. O-3, s.84; 1999,c.38,s.16 {eff.} Nov. 14/00.



                                         24
                           Oil and Natural Gas Act                  Cap. O-5                    25



83. The Minister may, by general or special orders
                                                                               Ministerial orders
    (a) designate a field by describing the surface area thereof;
    (b) designate a pool by describing the surface area vertically above
    the pool and by naming the geological formation and the zone in
    which the pool occurs;
    (c) determine whether a field or pool as described under clause (a) or
    (b) shall be operated for the production of oil or natural gas, or both;
    (d) designate the area that is to be allocated to a well in connection
    with fixing allowable production;
    (e) control and regulate the production of oil, natural gas, and water
    by restriction, proration, or prohibition; and
    (f) require the disposal into an underground formation or otherwise,
    in accordance with such terms and conditions as he may prescribe,
    of any water produced. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.85.
84. The Minister may, by general or special order, restrict the amount of      Restrictions on
oil or natural gas, or both, that may be produced in the province by           production of oil or
                                                                               natural gas
     (a) fixing a provincial allowable rate of production for oil not
     exceeding the market demand as determined by him;
     (b) allocating the provincial allowable rate of production for oil in a
     reasonable manner among the producing pools in the province by
     fixing the amount of oil that may be produced from each pool
     without waste to meet the provincial allowable rate of production so
     determined;
     (c) distributing the portion of the provincial allowable rate of
     production allocated to a pool among the wells in the pool in such a
     manner that each lessee may produce or receive his fair share of the
     oil in the pool;
     (d) limiting the total amount of natural gas that may be produced
     from any pool without waste, having regard to the market demand
     for natural gas, as determined by him, to an amount required for the
     efficient use of natural gas for the production of oil and for the
     efficient utilization of the natural gas reserves of the province.
     R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.86.
85. In order to prevent waste, the Minister may                                Prevention of waste
     (a) require the repressuring, recycling, or pressure maintenance of
     any pool or portion thereof, and for or incidental to that purpose
     require the introduction or injection into any pool or portion thereof
     of natural gas, air, water, or other substance; and
     (b) require that any natural gas be gathered, processed if necessary,
     and that the natural gas or liquid hydrocarbons extracted therefrom
     be marketed or injected into an underground reservoir for storage or
     for any other purpose. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.87.



                                     25
26                     Cap. O-5                   Oil and Natural Gas Act



                       86. No scheme for
Approval of
schemes
                            (a) repressuring, recycling, or pressure maintenance in any field or
                            pool;
                            (b) the processing, storage or disposal of natural gas; or
                            (c) the gathering, storage and disposal of water produced from any
                            field or pool,
                       shall be proceeded with unless the Minister, by order, has approved the
                       scheme upon such terms and conditions as the Minister may prescribe.
                       R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.88.
Publication            87. Every regulation and general or special order made under sections 82
                       to 86 shall be published in the Gazette. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.89.
Escape of oil or       88. If at any time an escape of oil or natural gas from a well is not
natural gas or water   prevented or if a flow of water is not controlled, the Minister may take
                       such means as may appear to him to be necessary or expedient in the
                       public interest to control and prevent the escape of oil, natural gas, or
                       water. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.90.
Discontinuance of      89. (1) If the Minister is satisfied, after an inquiry held upon such notice
operations             and to such persons as he considers proper, that a well is being operated
                       in such a way that any provision of this Act or of the regulations, or of an
                       order of the Minister is contravened or not complied with, the Minister
                       may order that on and after a date to be fixed by the order no production
                       is to be permitted from the well and that it is to be shut in and kept shut
                       in until such time as the Minister orders to the contrary.
Order for well to be     (2) If, in the opinion of the Minister, waste, damage to property, or
shut down              pollution can thereby be prevented, the Minister may order the well to be
                       shut down pending an inquiry under subsection (1), which inquiry shall
                       be held within fifteen days of the making of the order.
Drilling methods or      (3) Where it appears to the Minister that a method or practice being
practices              employed in any drilling, completion, suspension, abandonment, or
inadequate,
Ministerial order      production operation is in any way inadequate, improper or hazardous,
                       he may order orally, confirmed by a note in the daily drilling report, that
                       the operation be discontinued until methods approved by him are
                       adopted. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.91.
Prescribing
methods of             90. (1) The Minister may prescribe the methods to be used for the
measurements           measurement of oil, natural gas, and water, and the standard conditions
                       to which such measurements are to be converted.
Methods and              (2) If methods of measurement and standard conditions are prescribed
standard conditions,   under this section, the methods and standard conditions shall be used
use of
                       whenever the measurement of oil, natural gas, or water is required as a
                       result of the provisions of this Act. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.92.


                                                            26
                            Oil and Natural Gas Act                   Cap. O-5                      27



91. (1) When the Minister is of the opinion that, because of hazardous
                                                                                 Wild-well control
conditions in a field or at a well, it is necessary or expedient to close any
area and to shut out therefrom all persons except such as are specifically
authorized, the Minister may make an order in writing setting out and
delimiting the closed area prohibiting anyone during the time the order is
in effect from entering, travelling about, or remaining therein without a
travel permit issued under the authority of the Minister.
  (2) An order under subsection (1) may contain any terms and                    Terms and
conditions that the Minister considers necessary for the prevention of fire      conditions of order

in the closed area.
  (3) The Minister may provide for such notice as is practicable under           Notice
the circumstances, and may cause notice of the order setting out the area
closed to be published as in his opinion will give adequate publicity.
  (4) In addition to the notice provided by the subsection (3), the              Advising
Minister shall advise an appropriate representative of the Department of         Government of
                                                                                 Canada
Transport of Canada of the contents of the order made under subsection
(1). R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.93.
92. (1) Without restricting the generality of section 91, if, in the opinion     Enforcement of
of the Minister, the control of a well or any completion, suspension, or         orders and costs

abandonment is not in accordance with an order, direction, or
requirement of the Minister, the Chief Officer, or any person duly
authorized by the Minister, shall have access to and may enter upon the
well-site or any structure thereon and do whatever the Minister considers
necessary because of the failure to comply with the order, direction or
requirement.
   (2) The Minister of Finance and Municipal Affairs may use or expend           Use of deposits to
all or any part of the deposit made by the lessee to defray the costs,           defray costs

determined by the Minister, of or incidental to the work of control,
completion, suspension, or abandonment of the well to the satisfaction of
the Minister.
  (3) The return of the deposit or any part thereof, does not relieve the        Return of deposit,
lessee of the well of liability for any costs or of incidental to the control,   effect on liability

completion, suspension or abandonment of a well and does not reduce
his liability for such costs.
  (4) The costs incurred by the Minister under this section remaining            Costs incurred by
unpaid after applying thereto a deposit held by the Minister of Finance          Minister

and Municipal Affairs are a debt payable by the lessee of the well to the
Minister of Finance and Municipal Affairs. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3,
s.94; 1983, c.1, s.6; 1986, c.5, s.2; 1993, c.29, s.4; 2010,c.31,s.3.



                                      27
28                    Cap. O-5                   Oil and Natural Gas Act



                      93. (1) The Minister, for the enforcement of any order made by him
Enforcement of
Ministerial orders
                      under sections 91 and 92 may
                           (a) take such steps and employ such persons as he considers
                           necessary;
                           (b) forcibly or otherwise enter upon, seize, and take possession of
                           any well, together with the whole or part of the movable and
                           immovable property in, on, or about the well or used in connection
                           therewith or appertaining thereto together with any of the records
                           pertinent thereto;
                           (c) either discontinue all production or take over the management
                           and control of it;
                           (d) plug the well at any depth; and
                           (e) take such steps as he considers necessary to prevent the flow of
                           or escape of oil, natural gas, or water from any stratum that the well
                           enters.
Obeying order of        (2) Upon the Minister taking possession of a well and so long as the
Minister              possession continues, every officer and employee of the lessee or the
                      well agent, or contractor shall obey the orders concerning the well given
                      by the Minister, or by such person or persons as may be placed in charge
                      or control of the well.
Disposition of oil       (3) Upon possession being taken of any well, the Minister may take,
and natural gas       deal with, and dispose of all oil and natural gas produced at the well as if
                      it were the property of the Crown, subject to the payment of the net
                      proceeds thereof as provided in this section.
Costs and expenses      (4) The costs and expenses of and incidental to proceedings taken by
of proceedings        the Minister under this section are in the discretion of the Minister, and
                      the Minister may direct by whom and to what extent they are to be paid.
Payments from            (5) Without restricting the generality of the foregoing subsections, the
proceeds of oil and   Minister may pay, from the proceeds of the oil and natural gas produced
natural gas
                      at the well
                           (a) all costs and expenses of and incidental to the proceedings taken
                           by the Minister under this section, including the costs and expenses
                           of the management, operation, and control of the well by the
                           Minister; and
                           (b) all costs and expenses of carrying out investigations and
                           conservation measures that the Minister considers necessary in
                           connection with the well.
Payment of net          (6) The net proceeds of the oil and natural gas produced at the well
proceeds into court   remaining after the payment of the costs and expenses under subsection
                      (5) shall be paid by the Minister into the Supreme Court of Prince
                      Edward Island and thereafter shall be paid out to such persons and in


                                                           28
                            Oil and Natural Gas Act                  Cap. O-5                       29



such amounts as may be determined by a judge of the Supreme Court
upon the application of any person claiming to be entitled to any of the
proceeds.
  (7) If the proceeds of the oil and natural gas produced at the well are       Proceeds
not sufficient to pay all costs and expenses of and incidental to the           insufficient to pay
                                                                                costs and expenses
proceedings, investigations, and measures taken, and the Minister directs
that the balance of the costs and expenses or any part of it is to be paid
by the lessee of the well, then the provisions of section 92 regarding the
use of the deposit and regarding the further liability of the lessee of the
well with respect to the costs referred to in that section apply, with the
necessary changes, to the use of the deposit, and to the further liability of
the lessee, to defray the balance of the costs and expenses that are
incurred under this section. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.95.

                                 PART X
                                GENERAL
94. With the approval of the Minister, a permittee may, for testing             Production of oil
purposes only, produce oil or natural gas from one or more wells on his         and natural gas

location in accordance with whatever terms and conditions are
prescribed, but in no event shall the production continue for more than
ninety days. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.96.
95. The inclusion in a permit or lease of oil or natural gas that does not      Lease not
belong or is not reserved to Her Majesty in right of the province does not      invalidated by

invalidate a permit or a lease, with respect to the remainder of the permit
or lease. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.97.
96. The Lieutenant Governor in Council may authorize the Minister to            Unitization
enter into a unitization agreement for the unitized operation of a field or     agreement

pool or any part thereof, and upon its execution the unitization agreement
shall be binding on all parties thereto. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.98.
                                                                                Exploration work,
97. No person shall commence exploratory work until he has notified the         notice of
Chief Officer in writing of his intention to do so. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap.
O-3, s.99.

                           PART XI
                  TRANSFERS AND ASSIGNMENTS
98. A permittee or lessee shall not assign, transfer, sublet or part with the   Transfers and
possession of the rights described in his permit or lease, or any part          assignments

thereof without the approval of the Minister. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3,
s.100.




                                      29
30                    Cap. O-5                   Oil and Natural Gas Act



                      99. (1) No transfer, assignment, agreement or instrument affecting the
Preconditions to
transfers etc.
                      title to a location shall be recorded or effective unless
                            (a) the transfer, assignment, agreement, or instrument does not
                            conflict or result in any conflict with the provisions of this Act;
                            (b) the transfer, assignment, agreement, or instrument is made by or
                            on behalf of the permittee or of the lessee; or
                            (c) a transfer, assignment, agreement, or instrument affecting the
                            title to a location shall be deemed to be recorded and be effective
                            from and after the time that the application to record the transfer,
                            assignment, agreement, or instrument is received by the Chief
                            Officer.
Failure to record a     (2) Failure to record a transfer, assignment, agreement or instrument
transfer etc.         affecting the title to a location does not invalidate the transfer,
                      assignment, agreement, or instrument as between the parties thereto, but
                      the provisions of subsection (1) govern the effectiveness thereof with
                      respect to any other person.
Fee for recording       (3) No transfer, assignment, agreement, or instrument affecting title to
                      a location shall be recorded unless it is accompanied by the prescribed
                      fee.
Tranfer etc. to be      (4) Every transfer, assignment, agreement, or instrument affecting title
witnessed             to a location when made by an individual under this Act shall be
                      witnessed, and he shall sign his name and address, and when made by a
                      corporation shall be properly executed under the seal of the corporation
                      or its duly authorized attorney.
Registration of         (5) Where, by an instrument made pursuant to section 177 of the Bank
certain documents     Act (Canada), R.S.C. 1985, Chap. B-1, a lease of oil or natural gas, or
with Chief Officer
                      both, or any interest in the lease, is assigned, transferred, or set over as
                      security to a chartered bank by the lessee of, or by a person having an
                      interest in the lease, there shall be registered with the Chief Officer upon
                      payment of the prescribed fee
                           (a) an original or an executed copy of the instrument giving the
                           security; or
                           (b) a copy of the instrument giving the security certified by an
                           officer or employee of the bank to be a true copy.
Transfer of permit      (6) A holder of a permit or lease may make a valid transfer of his
or lease, to whom     permit, or lease, directly to himself, jointly with another or others; and
permitted
                      where the permit or lease is held by more than one person, they may
                      make a transfer directly to one or more of their number either alone or
                      jointly with some other person; and a trustee, executor, or administrator
                      may make a valid transfer of a permit or lease to himself individually



                                                           30
                            Oil and Natural Gas Act                  Cap. O-5                       31



where the making of the transfer is otherwise within his power.
R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.101; 1978, c.16, s.21.

                                PART XII
                                SURVEYS
100. (1) The location and the boundaries of every lease shall be surveyed       Surveys of leases
by a Prince Edward Island land surveyor within one year from the date of        and wells

instructions by the Minister to do so, and any such location not surveyed
within that time may be cancelled, unless the lessee can prove to the
Minister that, through no fault on his part, he has been unable to obtain a
Prince Edward Island land surveyor to survey the location.
  (2) A survey under this section shall be made in conformity with the          Surveys
requirements of the Chief Surveyor. 1971, c.27, s.103; 1999,c.38,s.16
{eff.} Nov. 14/00.

                           PART XIII
                   CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
101. (1) Subject to subsection (2), all records and instruments relating to     Public inspection of
oil and natural gas titles recorded pursuant to this Act shall, during          records and
                                                                                instruments
normal office hours be open to public inspection free of charge.
  (2) Geological, geophysical, and reports other than well reports and          Release of certain
well data received by the Chief Officer in the course of the                    reports restricted

administration of this Act, and designated by the Minister as confidential,
shall not be released except pursuant to the order of the Lieutenant
Governor in Council.
   (3) Notwithstanding subsection (2), with the permission in writing of        Release of
the person who is the holder of the permit, or lease, the location of which     information by
                                                                                Minister
is dealt within the report, the Minister may, at his sole discretion, release
information contained therein.
                                                                                Release of factual
   (4) Notwithstanding subsection (2), the Lieutenant Governor in               information
Council may release factual information considered confidential when it
is considered to be in the public interest to do so. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap.
O-3, s.103.

                              PART XIV
                           MISCELLANEOUS
102. Every permittee, or lessee shall register with the Chief Officer an        Address for service
address for service. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.104.




                                      31
32                     Cap. O-5                   Oil and Natural Gas Act



                       103. Every permit and lease shall be executed on the part of the Crown
Execution of
permits and leases
                       by the Minister under his hand and seal, and shall be kept on file in the
by Crown               office of the Chief Officer; and a duplicate thereof, or a copy thereof,
                       certified by the Minister, shall be executed and delivered to the permittee
                       or lessee, and shall in all courts have the like effect and force as the
                       original on file in the office of the Chief Officer. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap.
                       O-3, s.105.
Specific orders        104. In any case where the Lieutenant Governor in Council may make a
directed at specific   regulation of general or particular application, the Minister may, if it
people
                       appears to him necessary to do so for the preservation or protection of
                       life or property, or oil or natural gas, or oil or natural gas field or part
                       thereof, or any well or other work, or any investment, make a specific
                       order directed to a particular person or persons which order shall without
                       publication in the Gazette, be of the same effect as a regulation, for such
                       period not exceeding thirty days as the Minister specified in such order,
                       but the Lieutenant Governor in Council or the Minister may at any time
                       revoke or suspend any such order. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-3, s.106.
Effective date of      105. Any regulation and any amendment, alteration or repeal thereof
regulations            made under this Act become effective in all respects as if enacted in this
                       Act upon the publication thereof in the Gazette. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. O-
                       3, s.107.
Penalties              106. Any person who contravenes any provision of this Act or of any
                       regulations or order made hereunder in addition to any other penalty
                       provided for in the regulations is liable upon summary conviction to a
                       penalty not exceeding $1,000 and every day during which a
                       contravention continues may constitute a separate offence. R.S.P.E.I.
                       1974, Cap. O-3, s.108; 1994, c.58, s.6.
Fees, fines, etc.      107. All fees, fines and penalties collected under this Act shall be made
                       payable to the Minister of Finance and Municipal Affairs and submitted
                       to the Chief Officer. 1971, c.27, s.110; 1983, c.1, s.6; 1986, c.5, s.2;
                       1993, c.29, s.4; 2010,c.31,s.3.




                                                            32
