                             PLEASE NOTE
This document, prepared by the Legislative Counsel Office, is an office
consolidation of this regulation, current to July 31, 2010. It is intended for
information and reference purposes only.

This document is not the official version of these regulations. The regulations and
the amendments printed in the Royal Gazette should be consulted to determine the
authoritative text of these regulations.

For more information concerning the history of these regulations, please see the
Table of Regulations.

If you find any errors or omissions in this consolidation, please contact:

                             Legislative Counsel Office
                                Tel: (902) 368-4291
                            Email: legislation@gov.pe.ca
                              CHAPTER P-4

                    PESTICIDES CONTROL ACT

                              REGULATIONS

Pursuant to section 22 of the Pesticides Control Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988,
Cap. P-4, Council made the following regulations:

1. (1) In these regulations                                                  Definitions

    (a) “Act” means the Pesticides Control Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap. P-      Act
    4;
    (a.1) “AG-1 Pesticide Use Certificate” means a pesticide use             AG-1 Pesticide
                                                                             Use Certificate
    certificate that
       (i) was issued by the Director under subsection 21(1) of the prior
       regulations,
       (ii) was valid on December 31, 2005, and
       (iii) was identified by the words “AG-1 Pesticide Use Certificate”
       or “Level 1 Agricultural Pesticide Use Certificate” on the face of
       the certificate;
    (a.2) “AG-2 Pesticide Use Certificate” means a pesticide use             AG-2 Pesticide Use
    certificate that                                                         Certificate

       (i) was issued by the Director under subsection 21(1) of the prior
       regulations,
       (ii) was valid on December 31, 2005, and
       (iii) was identified by the words “AG-2 Pesticide Use Certificate”
       or “Level 2 Agricultural Pesticide Use Certificate” on the face of
       the certificate;
    (b) revoked by EC711/08;                                                 Agreement

    (c) “agricultural operation” means an agricultural operation operated    agricultural
    for the purpose of producing agricultural products or services in the    operation

    expectation of gain or reward, including
       (i) clearing, draining, irrigating and cultivating land,
       (ii) raising or keeping livestock, including cattle, horses, sheep,
       swine and poultry,
       (iii) raising or keeping fur-bearing animals, game birds, game
       animals and honey bees,
       (iv) producing agricultural, horticultural, or silvicultural crops,
       including non-food crops,
       (v) operating agricultural machinery and equipment, including
       noise-scare devices,


                                    1
2                       Cap. P-4                       Pesticides Control Act            Updated 2010
                                                            Regulations


                                   (vi) preparing a farm product for distribution from the farm gate,
                                   including cleaning, grading and packaging,
                                   (vii) on-farm processing of farm products for the purpose of
                                   preparing farm products for wholesale or retail distribution and
                                   consumption,
                                   (viii) applying fertilizers, soil conditioners and pesticides,
                                   including ground and aerial application,
                                   (ix) storing, using or disposing of organic wastes for farm
                                   purposes, and
                                   (x) operating pick-your-own farms, road-side farm produce stands
                                   and farm tourist operations as part of the farm operation;
apply                        (d) “apply” means to release a pesticide into the environment;
buffer zone                  (e) “buffer zone” means a buffer zone as defined in the Watercourse
                             and Wetland Protection Regulations made pursuant to the
                             Environmental Protection Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap.E-9;
certified applicator         (f) “certified applicator” means a person who holds a Pesticide
                             Applicator Certificate issued by the Minister under section 6;
certified assistant          (f.1) revoked by EC71/07;
concentrated                 (g) “concentrated pesticide” means any non-domestic pesticide
pesticide                    product that requires mixing or dilution prior to application and
                             which has not yet been mixed or diluted;
continuing                   (h) “continuing education credits” or “CECs” means continuing
education credits or         education credits that may be earned by an individual in accordance
CECs
                             with section 3;
controlled purchase          (h.1) “controlled purchase domestic pesticide” means
domestic pesticide              (i) any domestic pesticide that is not designated as a self-select
                                domestic pesticide, or
                                (ii) any fertilizer, within the meaning of the Fertilizers Act
                                (Canada), that contains a pesticide;
domestic pesticide           (i) “domestic pesticide” means a pesticide registered as domestic
                             pursuant to the regulations made under the Pest Control Products
                             Act (Canada);
enclosed leak proof          (j) “enclosed leak proof container” means a container that is
container                    impermeable to a liquid and has an obvious top and a bottom;
 fertilizer-pesticide        (j.1) “fertilizer-pesticide blended product” means any fertilizer that
 blended product             contains a combination of fertilizer and pesticide;
 granular                    (j.2) “granular spreadable pesticide” means a pesticide that is
 spreadable                  granular or pelletized and is designed to be applied at a calculated
 pesticide
                             rate by means of a user-adjustable spreading device;


                                                                 2
Updated 2010               Pesticides Control Act                 Cap. P-4                        3
                                Regulations


    (j.3) “hose-end pesticide” means a pesticide concentrate or solution
                                                                             hose-end pesticide
    that is designed to be applied using a garden hose;
    (k) “label” has the same meaning as it does in the PCP Act               label
    (Canada);
                                                                             Loader/mixer
    (l) “Loader/mixer Certificate” means a Loader/mixer Certificate          Certificate
    issued by the Minister under section 10;
    (m) “non-domestic pesticide” means a pesticide registered as             non-domestic
    commercial, industrial, agricultural, or restricted by the regulations   pesticide

    made under the PCP Act (Canada);
    (n) “Non-domestic Pesticide Vendor Business Licence” means a             Non-domestic
    licence issued by the Minister under section 13;                         Pesticide Vendor
                                                                             Business Licence
    (o) “Non-domestic Pesticide Vendor Certificate” means a certificate      Non-domestic
    issued by the Minister under section 14;                                 Pesticide Vendor
                                                                             Certificate
    (p) “noxious weed” means a weed designated as a noxious weed             noxious weed
    under the Weed Control Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap. W-2.1;
    (q) “package” includes any container, wrapping, covering or holder       package
    in which any pesticide is wholly or partly contained, placed or
    packed;
    (r) “PCP Act (Canada)” means the Pest Control Products Act               PCP Act (Canada)
    (Canada);
    (r.1) “PCP Act (Canada) Number” means the registration number of         PCP Act (Canada)
    the pest control product, signified as follows: “REGISTRATION            Number

    NO. (assigned registration number) PEST CONTROL PRODUCTS
    ACT” or “REG. NO. (assigned registration number) PCP Act”;
    (s) “Pesticide Application Business Licence” means a Pesticide           Pesticide
    Application Business Licence issued by the Minister under section        Application
                                                                             Business Licence
    5;
    (t) “pesticide application equipment” means equipment that is used       pesticide
    to apply a pesticide and includes                                        application
                                                                             equipment
        (i) a tractor and a tow-behind unit,
        (ii) a self-propelled unit, and
        (iii) a truck with a spray tank and pump affixed within the cargo
        compartment of the truck;
    (u) “Pesticide Application Permit” means a Pesticide Application         Pesticide
    Permit issued by the Minister under section 19                           Application Permit

    (v) “Pesticide Applicator Certificate” means a Pesticide Applicator      Pesticide Applicator
    Certificate issued by the Minister under section 6;                      Certificate




                                     3
4                      Cap. P-4                    Pesticides Control Act                Updated 2010
                                                        Regulations


                            (v.1) “pesticide concentrate” means a pesticide product or
 pesticide
 concentrate                formulation that requires mixing, dilution, or some other form of
                            measuring or measurement-related handling by the user prior to
                            application;
Pesticide Purchase          (w) “Pesticide Purchase Permit” means a Pesticide Purchase Permit
Permit                      issued by the Minister under section 16;
 pesticide requiring        (w.1) “pesticide   requiring     preparation”    means   a     pesticide
 preparation                concentrate;
Phase III storage           (x) “Phase III storage facility” means a storage facility designed and
facility                    maintained to store domestic and non-domestic pesticides, in
                            accordance with the Canadian Warehousing Standards for the
                            Storage of Agrichemical Products, Crop Life Canada, January 2002
                            as amended;
prior regulations           (y) “prior regulations” means the prior regulations (EC583/84) made
                            under the Act and revoked by these regulations;
ready-to-use                (y.01) “ready-to-use herbicide” means a herbicide that does not
herbicide                   require dilution or mixing prior to application;
self-select domestic        (y.1) “self-select domestic pesticide” means any domestic pesticide
pesticide                   designated as a self-select pesticide under subsection (8);
spot treatment              (y.2) “spot treatment” means the limited application of a pesticide to
                            an area that is not more than 10% of the potential area for treatment;
Steering Committee          (z) “revoked by EC711/08;
training event              (aa) “training event” means a class or program that provides training
                            in a subject within a pesticide training category listed in section 2;
WHMIS                       (bb) “WHMIS” means         the       Workplace   Hazardous    Materials
                            Information System.
Application              (2) Revoked by EC71/07.
Research not             (3) Nothing in these regulations shall be construed to prevent the use
prevented              of a pesticide under the authority of a permit for the purposes of research
                       or testing by officials or other qualified persons employed by a university
                       or other institution of research and higher learning or by agencies of the
                       federal or provincial Government.
Pesticide standards      (4) The standards and requirements for registration, packaging and
                       labelling, efficacy and safety, in respect of the sale, handling and use of
                       any pesticide shall be the standards and requirements established by the
                       PCP Act (Canada) and the regulations made under that Act together with
                       the Act and these regulations.


                                                             4
Updated 2010               Pesticides Control Act                 Cap. P-4                        5
                                Regulations


  (5) These regulations apply to all pesticides except as follows:
                                                                             Application
    (a) sections 24 and 25 do not apply to exempted pesticides listed in
    Schedule 7;
    (b) subsection 1(8) and section 20.2 are the only provisions of these
    regulations that apply to self-select pesticides listed in Schedule 8;
    (c) these regulations do not apply to excluded pesticides listed in
    Schedule 2.
  (6) The pesticides listed in Schedule 2 are designated as excluded         Excluded pesticides
pesticides.
                                                                             Exempted domestic
  (7) The pesticides listed in Schedule 7 are designated as exempted         pesticides
pesticides.
  (8) The pesticides listed in Schedule 8 are designated as self-select      Self-select domestic
domestic pesticides. (EC761/05; 313/06; 71/07; 290/08; 711/08; 189/10;       pesticides

189/10; 189/10)

                   PESTICIDE TRAINING EVENTS
2. For the purposes of these regulations, the following categories of        Categories of
pesticide training events are prescribed:                                    pesticide training
                                                                             events
     (a) General Information Training, respecting the general application,
     handling or storage of pesticides;
     (b) Pesticide Law Training, respecting federal and provincial laws
     relating to pesticides;
     (c) Pesticide Label Training, identifying pesticides and using the
     information on pesticide labels;
     (d) Human Health Effects Training, respecting the effect of
     pesticides on human health, including
        (i) acute and chronic toxicity,
        (ii) routes of exposure,
        (iii) factors affecting exposure,
        (iv) reducing exposure and risk, and
        (v) recognition of pesticide poisoning;
     (e) Pesticide Safety Training, including
        (i) attitudes toward pesticide application and safety,
        (ii) general precautions in the use of or exposure to pesticides,
        (iii) selecting and purchasing pesticides,
        (iv) protective clothing and equipment,
        (v) transportation, storage and disposal,
        (vi) mixing and loading,
        (vii) safety during application,
        (viii) re-entry of places where application has occurred, and
        (ix) application records;
     (f) Environmental Impact Training, including


                                     5
6                     Cap. P-4                     Pesticides Control Act              Updated 2010
                                                        Regulations


                               (i) residual impact of pesticides,
                               (ii) aquatic impact, and
                               (iii) land impact;
                           (g) Pest Management Training, including
                               (i) integrated pest management,
                               (ii) pest identification and biology, and
                               (iii) monitoring methods, action and injury levels;
                           (h) Pesticide Application Technology Training, including
                               (i) equipment selection,
                               (ii) proper equipment set up, use and maintenance,
                               (iii) equipment calibration and pesticide use calculations, and
                               (iv) pesticide products, and factors affecting their use and
                               performance;
                           (i) Emergency Response Training, including
                               (i) pesticide spills,
                               (ii) fire and pesticides, and
                               (iii) first aid,
                           (j) Professional Conduct Training, including dealing effectively with
                           clients and with the public regarding the use of pesticides;
                           (k) other pesticide issues training, as may be approved by the
                           Director. (EC761/05; 290/08)
Earning CECs          3. A person who
                           (a) holds an AG-1 Pesticide Use Certificate or a Class A Pesticide
                           Applicator Certificate; and
                           (b) attends a training event approved by the Minister,
                      shall earn CECs on an hour-for-hour basis or in a manner otherwise
                      approved by the Minister. (EC761/05; 313/06; 290/08; 711/08)

                                      LICENCES, CERTIFICATES, PERMITS
Fees                  4. (1) The fees for an application for, or renewal of, a licence, certificate
                      or permit under these regulations shall be payable to the Minister of
                      Finance and Municipal Affairs in the amount set out in Schedule 4 of
                      these regulations.
Forms                   (2) An application, and a licence, certificate or permit issued by the
                      Minister under these regulations shall be in the appropriate form set out
                      in Schedule 3 of these regulations.
Applicants shall be     (3) All applicants for a licence, certificate or permit issued by the
18                    Minister shall be at least 18 years of age and pay the required fee at the
                      time of the application. (EC761/05; 189/10)




                                                             6
Updated 2010                Pesticides Control Act                  Cap. P-4                        7
                                 Regulations


5. (1) Subject to subsections (6) and (7), the Minister may, on
                                                                               Licences
application, issue one or more of the Pesticide Application Business
Licences described in subsection (2) to a person who
     (a) provides proof of a current policy of insurance with coverage of
        (i) at least $500,000 for pollution liability, and
        (ii) at least $1,000,000 for general public liability;
     (b) provides proof of the ownership of, or access to, a pesticide
     storage facility described in subsection 20(2); and
     (c) provides proof that the business for which the licence is intended
     employs at least one person who holds a Pesticide Applicator
     Certificate appropriate to the Pesticide Application Business Licence
     applied for.
  (2) The following classes of Pesticide Application Business Licences         Classes of licence
may be issued by the Minister under subsection (1) in respect of the
activities herein described:
     (a) a Class A Pesticide Application Business Licence authorizes the
     holder of the licence to operate ground agricultural equipment, if
        (i) the person uses the equipment to apply a pesticide for a fee,
        charge or other valuable consideration, and
        (ii) fifty per cent or more of the annual usage of the equipment is
        a use described in subclause (i);
     (b) a Class B Pesticide Application Business Licence authorizes the
     holder of the licence to offer a service involving the application of a
     pesticide for the control of mosquitoes or biting flies;
     (c) a Class C-1 Pesticide Application Business Licence authorizes
     the holder of the licence to offer a service involving the application
     of a non-fumigant pesticide to stored feed, or to dwellings or other
     structures;
     (d) a Class C-2 Pesticide Application Business Licence authorizes
     the holder of the licence to offer a service involving the application
     of a fumigant pesticide to stored feed, or to dwellings or other
     structures;
     (e) a Class D Pesticide Application Business Licence authorizes the
     holder of the licence to offer a service involving the application of a
     seed or seed-piece treatment pesticide;
     (f) a Class E Pesticide Application Business Licence authorizes the
     holder of the licence to offer a service involving the application of a
     pesticide to ornamental vegetation, golf course turf and other non-
     crop areas not referred to in clause (c) or (d);
     (g) a Class F-1 Pesticide Application Business Licence authorizes
     the holder of the licence to offer a pesticide application service for
     forestry herbicide application;




                                      7
8                     Cap. P-4                     Pesticides Control Act              Updated 2010
                                                        Regulations


                           (h) a Class F-2 Pesticide Application Business Licence authorizes
                           the holder of the licence to supervise the application of a pesticide
                           for the production of tree seedlings for reforestation purposes;
                           (i) a Class G Pesticide Application Business Licence authorizes the
                           holder of the licence to supervise the application of a pesticide in a
                           greenhouse other than a person who holds a Class F-2 licence;
                           (j) a Class H Pesticide Application Business Licence authorizes the
                           holder of the licence to offer a service involving the application of a
                           soil fumigant pesticide;
                           (k) a Class I Pesticide Application Business Licence authorizes the
                           holder of the licence to offer a service involving the application of a
                           herbicide using a wiper, brush, roller or by a spot treatment;
                           (l) a Class J Pesticide Application Business Licence authorizes the
                           holder of the licence to offer a pesticide application service specified
                           in the licence.
Conditions on           (3) The Minister may impose any conditions on a Pesticide
licence               Application Business Licence issued or renewed under this section that
                      the Minister considers necessary for the protection of human health or
                      the environment.
Expiry
                         (4) A Pesticide Application Business Licence shall be issued on Form
                      4 of Schedule 3 and expires on December 31 of the year in which the
                      licence is issued.
Effective date of       (5) Clause (2)(e) comes into force on April 1, 2007.
clause (2)(e)
Insurance not           (6) A person who applies for a Class B Pesticide Application Business
required, where       Licence is not required to hold the insurance coverage required by
                      subclause (1)(a)(i) if the person provides to the Minister written
                      confirmation that the person will not offer a service involving the
                      application of a chemical-based pesticide during the term of the licence
                      applied for.
Insurance not           (7) A person who applies for a Class D Pesticide Application Business
required for          Licence is not required to hold the insurance coverage required by
pollution liability
                      subclause (1)(a)(i). (EC761/05; 313/06; 71/07; 290/08)
AG-1 Pesticide Use    5.1 (1) An AG-1 Pesticide Use Certificate issued under the prior
Certificate           regulations is deemed to have been issued under these regulations.
Expiry of AG-1         (2) An AG-1 Pesticide Use Certificate expires on
Pesticide Use             (a) the date shown on the face of the certificate; or
Certificate
                          (b) the date on which a conditional Class A Pesticide Applicator
                          Certificate is issued to the holder under clause 8(3)(a),
                      whichever is earlier.



                                                             8
Updated 2010                Pesticides Control Act                 Cap. P-4                    9
                                 Regulations


  (3) Revoked by 71/07. (EC313/06; 71/07)
                                                                              Expiry of AG-2
                                                                              Pesticide Use
                                                                              Certificate
6. (1) The Minister may, on application, issue or renew one or more of        Applicator
the Pesticide Applicator Certificates listed in subsection (2) to a person    certificates

who has successfully completed a written examination approved by the
Director and appropriate to the class of certificate applied for, with a
mark in the examination of not less than 75%.
  (2) The following classes of certificate may be issued by the Minister      Classes of
under subsection (1) in respect of the activities herein described:           certificate

    (a) a Class A Pesticide Applicator Certificate authorizes the holder
    of the certificate to apply pesticides to control pests
        (i) on an agricultural crop or a product that is not located in a
        greenhouse, and
        (ii) on agricultural land;
    (b) a Class B Pesticide Applicator Certificate authorizes the holder
    of the certificate to apply a pesticide to control mosquitoes or biting
    flies;
    (c) a Class C-1 Pesticide Applicator Certificate authorizes the holder
    of the certificate to apply a non-fumigant pesticide to stored feed,
    dwellings or other structures;
    (d) a Class C-2 Pesticide Applicator Certificate authorizes the holder
    of the certificate to apply a fumigant pesticide to stored feed,
    dwellings or other structures;
    (e) a Class D Pesticide Applicator Certificate authorizes the holder
    of the certificate to apply a pesticide as a seed or seed-piece
    treatment;
    (f) a Class E Pesticide Applicator Certificate authorizes the holder of
    the certificate to apply a pesticide to ornamental vegetation, golf
    course turf and other non-crop areas not referred to in clause (c) or
    (d);
    (g) a Class F-1 Pesticide Applicator Certificate authorizes the holder
    of the certificate to apply a forestry herbicide;
    (h) a Class F-2 Pesticide Applicator Certificate authorizes the holder
    of the certificate to apply a pesticide for the production of tree
    seedlings for reforestation purposes;
    (i) a Class G Pesticide Applicator Certificate authorizes the holder of
    the certificate to apply a pesticide in a greenhouse, other than a
    person who holds a Class F-2 certificate;
    (j) a Class H Pesticide Applicator Certificate authorizes the holder of
    the certificate to apply a soil fumigant pesticide;
    (k) a Class I Pesticide Applicator Certificate authorizes the holder of
    the certificate to apply a herbicide using a wiper, brush or roller, or
    by a spot treatment;


                                      9
10                    Cap. P-4                    Pesticides Control Act              Updated 2010
                                                       Regulations


                           (l) a Class J Pesticide Applicator Certificate authorizes the holder of
                           the certificate to apply a pesticide for a purpose specified in the
                           certificate.
Class D Certificate      (2.1) Notwithstanding subsection (1), the Minister may, on application,
                      issue a Class D Pesticide Applicator Certificate to an applicant who
                           (a) has successfully completed a seed and seed-piece treatment
                           training program approved by the Director, with or without the
                           completion of a written examination; and
                           (b) holds a valid Class A Pesticide Applicator Certificate, a valid
                           AG-1 Pesticide Use Certificate or a valid Loader/mixer Certificate.
Class I Pesticide        (2.2) Notwithstanding subsection (1), the Minister may, on application,
Applicator            issue a Class I Pesticide Applicator Certificate to an applicant who
Certificate
                           (a) has successfully completed a training program on the application
                           of a herbicide using a wiper, brush or roller approved by the
                           Director, with or without the completion of a written examination;
                           and
                           (b) holds a valid Class A Pesticide Applicator Certificate, a valid
                           AG-1 Pesticide Use Certificate or a valid Loader/mixer Certificate.
Conditions
                        (3) The Minister may impose any conditions on a Pesticide Applicator
                      Certificate issued under this section that the Minister considers necessary
                      for the protection of human health or the environment.
Expiry                  (4) A Pesticide Applicator Certificate shall be issued on Form 5 of
                      Schedule 3 and expires on the expiry date shown on the certificate.
Waiver of exam          (5) The Minister may, at the Minister’s discretion, waive the
requirement           examination requirement in subsection (1) for any person who, between
                      January 1, 2002 and January 1, 2006, has
                          (a) successfully completed a written examination approved by the
                          Minister appropriate to the class of certificate applied for; and
                          (b) attained a mark in the examination of not less than 75%.
Class A Pesticide       (5.1) Revoked by EC71/07. (EC313/06; 71/07)
Use Certificate to
holder of AG-2

Expiry                  (5.2) Revoked by EC71/07. (EC313/06; 71/07)
Effective date of       (6) Clause (2)(e) comes into force on April 1, 2007.
clause (1)(e)
Subsection (5)          (7) Subsection (5) is revoked on January 1, 2011. (EC761/05; 313/06;
revoked               71/07; 290/08; 711/08)




                                                           10
Updated 2010                Pesticides Control Act                 Cap. P-4                    11
                                 Regulations


7. (1) Subject to subsection (3), the Minister shall, on application, renew
                                                                              Renewal of Class A
a Class A Pesticide Applicator Certificate issued under subsection 6(2)       Pesticide Applicator
if, before the expiry of the certificate, the holder of the certificate       Certificate
     (a) has earned a total of not less than 15 CECs in the pesticide
     training categories listed in section 2 as follows:
        (i) at least 8 CECs in the categories described as Pest
        Management Training, Pesticide Application Technology
        Training, Effects on Human Health Training, and Pesticide Safety
        Training,
        (ii) the remaining 7 CECs in any other category described in
        section 2; or
     (b) has
        (i) successfully completed a written examination approved by the
        Director, with a mark in the examination of not less than 75%,
        and
        (ii) demonstrated to the Director that he or she has the knowledge
        and skills necessary to safely and effectively handle, store and
        apply pesticides.
  (2) The Minister may not accept, for the purposes of subsection (1),        Acceptable CECs
    (a) more than 5 CECs in any one pesticide training category;
    (b) more than 8 CECs earned in a calendar year.
                                                                              Expiry
  (3) A Class A Pesticide Applicator Certificate renewed under
subsection (1) is valid until
    (a) the date of expiry shown on the certificate; or
    (b) five years from the date the certificate was issued,
whichever is earlier. (EC761/05; 290/08; 711/08)
8. (1) The Minister shall, on the application of an individual, issue a       Conditional Class A
conditional Class A Pesticide Applicator Certificate to the individual if     Pesticide Applicator
                                                                              Certificate
the individual
     (a) either
        (i) held an AG-1 Pesticide Use Certificate, issued under the prior
        regulations, that expired not earlier than May 1, 2002, or
        (ii) holds an AG-1 Pesticide Use Certificate that will expire not
        later than December 31, 2007; and
     (b) has provided proof, satisfactory to the Director, of the number of
     CECs earned within the time period required by Schedule 5.
  (2) A conditional Class A Pesticide Applicator Certificate issued under     Expiry
subsection (1) expires on the expiry date shown on the certificate.
 (3) The Minister may issue a conditional Class A Pesticide Applicator        Conditional Class A
Certificate to an individual if the individual holds an AG-1 Pesticide Use    Pesticide Applicator
                                                                              Certificate
Certificate.


                                     11
12                     Cap. P-4                     Pesticides Control Act              Updated 2010
                                                         Regulations


                         (4) A conditional Class A Pesticide Applicator Certificate issued to an
Expiry
                       individual under subsection (3) expires on the date shown on the AG-1
                       Pesticide Use Certificate. (EC761/05; 313/06; 71/07; 290/08)
Records of pesticide   9. (1) Every person who holds a Pesticide Applicator Certificate shall, in
use or application     such manner as may be required by the Minister, keep records of each
                       pesticide use or application, which shall include the following:
                            (a) the name, address and telephone number, and Pesticide
                            Applicator Certificate Number of the pesticide applicator;
                            (b) the name, address, and telephone number of the person for whom
                            the pesticide is being applied;
                            (c) the location and dimensions of the area where the pesticide was
                            applied;
                            (d) the date and start time of the pesticide application;
                            (e) the air temperature, wind speed, and wind direction measured at
                            the point of application at the start time of the pesticide application;
                            (f) the name of any pest to be controlled or the purpose of the
                            pesticide application;
                            (g) the trade name and PCP Act (Canada) number of the pesticide
                            applied;
                            (h) the rate of pesticide application.
Record to be made
within 72 hours          (2) Every person required to keep records under subsection (1) shall
                       enter the use or application of a pesticide in the records not later than 72
                       hours after a pesticide use or application.
Records to be kept       (3) A person who made, or caused to be made, the records under this
at least 3 years       section shall
                            (a) keep the records for a period of at least three years from the date
                            of the use or application of the pesticide; and
                            (b) make the records available to any environment officer appointed
                            under the Environmental Protection Act, environmental health
                            officer appointed under the Public Health Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap.
                            P-30, medical practitioner registered under the Medical Act
                            R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap. M-5 or conservation officer appointed or
                            designated under the Wildlife Conservation Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988,
                            Cap. W-4.1. (EC761/05; 313/06; 71/07; 290/08)
Loader/mixer           10. (1) The Minister may, on application, issue a Loader/mixer
Certificate            Certificate to a person who has successfully completed a loader/mixer
                       training program approved by the Director.
Conditions               (2) The Minister may impose such conditions on a Loader/mixer
                       Certificate issued under subsection (1) as the Minister considers
                       necessary for the protection of human health or the environment.



                                                             12
Updated 2010                Pesticides Control Act                  Cap. P-4                       13
                                 Regulations


 (3) A Loader/mixer Certificate
                                                                               Expiry
    (a) shall be issued on Form 1 of Schedule 3; and
    (b) expires
       (i) five years from the date on which the certificate was issued, or
       (ii) on the date printed on the certificate
whichever is earlier. (EC761/05; 313/06; 71/07)
11. The following certificates issued by the Minister under the prior          Certificates expired
regulations expired on December 31, 2006:
    (a) Level 2 Biting Fly Pesticide Use Certificate;
    (b) AG-2 Pesticide Use Certificate. (EC761/05; 71/07)
12. (1) Not later than January 31 of each year, every person who operates      Sales data
a business involving the sale or supply of a domestic or non-domestic
pesticide shall provide the Minister with sales data for all domestic and
non-domestic pesticides sold to retail customers for the previous calendar
year.
  (2) For the purposes of this section, “sales data” means                     “sales data”,
    (a) the trade or product name of the domestic or non-domestic              defined

    pesticide;
    (b) the PCP Act (Canada) number; and
    (c) the quantity sold, including the unit measure. (EC761/05)
  (3) Not later than January 31 of each year, every holder of a Class E        Information to be
Pesticide Application Business Licence and every operator of a golf            provided to the
                                                                               Minister
course shall, for the previous calendar year, provide the following
information, in writing, to the Minister:
     (a) the trade name, PCP Act (Canada) Number, and quantity of any
     herbicide, including the unit measure, applied on:
        (i) residential properties,
        (ii) commercial and industrial properties,
        (iii) commercial golf courses;
     (b) the trade name, PCP Act (Canada) Number, and quantity of any
     insecticide, including the unit measure, applied on:
        (i) residential properties,
        (ii) commercial and industrial properties,
        (iii) commercial golf courses;
     (c) the trade name, PCP Act (Canada) Number, and quantity of
     fungicide, including the unit measure, applied on:
        (i) residential properties,
        (ii) commercial and industrial properties,
        (iii) commercial golf courses;
     (d) the total area of turf under management, including the unit
     measure, that is comprised of:
        (i) residential properties,


                                     13
14                    Cap. P-4                       Pesticides Control Act            Updated 2010
                                                          Regulations


                                 (ii) commercial and industrial properties,
                                 (iii) commercial golf courses. (EC189/10)


Non-domestic          13. (1) The Minister may, on application, issue or renew a Non-domestic
Pesticide Vendor      Pesticide Vendor Business Licence to a person who
Business Licence
                           (a) has provided proof that the person for which the licence is
                           intended
                              (i) owns, or has arrangements to use, a Phase III storage facility to
                              store non-domestic pesticides, and
                              (ii) employs at least one person who holds a Non-domestic
                              Pesticide Vendor Certificate; and
                           (b) has provided the sales data required by section 12 for the
                           calendar year previous to the year the licence is requested.
Licence must be         (1.1) A person who holds a Non-Domestic Pesticide Vendor Business
displayed             Licence shall display the licence issued for each store or facility owned
                      or operated by the person, at such store or facility.
More than one           (1.2) Where a person owns more than one store or facility for which a
store, facility       Non-domestic Pesticide Vendor Business Licence is issued or renewed
                      under subsection (1), the Minister shall charge only one fee for all of the
                      stores or locations, but the fee shall be calculated on the sales data
                      provided in respect of such store or location as the Minister determines.
Fee based on sales      (2) The fee payable for an application or a renewal of a Non-domestic
data                  Pesticide Vendor Business Licence under subsection (1) shall be based
                      on the sales data provided in clause (1)(c) as determined in Schedule 4.
Where no historical     (3) Where there is no historical pesticides sales data available on
sale data available   which to base the fee payable for a Non-domestic Pesticide Vendor
                      Business Licence, the fee payable may be based on reasonable
                      projections of sales data provided by the applicant and approved by the
                      Minister, as determined in Schedule 4.
Conditions on           (4) The Minister may impose any conditions on a Non-domestic
licence               Pesticide Vendor Business Licence issued or renewed under this section
                      that the Minister considers necessary for the protection of human health
                      or the environment.
Expiry                  (5) A Non-domestic Pesticide Vendor Business Licence shall be issued
                      on Form 2 of Schedule 3 and expires
                          (a) on the last day of February of the year following the date of issue
                          of the licence; or




                                                              14
Updated 2010               Pesticides Control Act                 Cap. P-4                       15
                                Regulations


    (b) when the person for which the licence is issued no longer
    employs at least one person who holds a Non-domestic Pesticide
    Vendor Certificate,
whichever occurs earlier.
                                                                             Transitional
  (6) A valid Pesticide Sales Licence issued in 2005 under the prior
regulations is deemed to be a Non-domestic Pesticide Vendor Business
Licence and expires on the date of expiry in the Pesticide Sales Licence.
  (7) A valid Pesticide Sales Licence issued under the prior regulations     Licence under prior
to a person who successfully completed an examination on or after            regulations

January 1, 2002 for the purpose of obtaining a Pesticide Sales Licence,
personally or on behalf of their employer,
    (a) is deemed to be a Non-domestic Pesticide Vendor Certificate;
    and
    (b) expires five years from the date on which the person completed
    the examination.
  (8) Clause (5)(b) comes into force on March 1, 2006.                       Effective date of
                                                                             clause (5)(b)
  (9) Revoked by EC290/08. (EC761/05; 71/07; 290/08)                         Revocation

13.1 (1) The Minister may, on application, issue or renew a Domestic         Domestic Pesticides
Pesticide Vendor Business Licence to a person who                            Vendor Business
                                                                             Licence
    (a) owns or operates a store or location that sells or supplies a
    controlled purchase domestic pesticide;
    (b) holds, or employs at least one person who holds, a Domestic
    Pesticide Vendor Certificate;
    (c) provides to the Minister an estimate of the maximum size of all
    indoor and outdoor display areas and storage facilities for controlled
    purchase domestic pesticides required for the year for which the
    application is made; and
    (d) pays the application fee.
  (2) The calculation of the fee payable for an application or a renewal     Calculation of fee
of a Domestic Pesticide Vendor Business Licence under subsection (1)
shall be based on the size of the display areas and storage facilities as
provided to the Minister under clause (1)(b) and determined in
accordance with Schedule 4.
  (3) Where the licensee or the Minister determines that the actual size     Revised fee
of the indoor and outdoor display areas and storage facilities to be used
during the term of the licence is less than or greater than the estimate
provided under clause (1)(b), the Minister may revise the fee and send
the applicant a written notice of the revised fee.




                                    15
16                   Cap. P-4                    Pesticides Control Act              Updated 2010
                                                      Regulations


                       (4) Where a person owns more than one store or location for which a
More than one
store, location
                     Domestic Pesticide Vendor Business Licence is issued or renewed under
                     subsection (1), the Minister shall charge one fee only for all of the stores
                     or locations, but the fee shall be calculated on the size of the display and
                     storage facilities in respect of such store or location as the Minister
                     determines.
Display licence
                      (5) A licensee shall display a licence at each store or location for
                     which the Minister has issued or renewed a licence under subsection (1).
Conditions             (6) The Minister may impose any conditions on a Domestic Pesticide
                     Vendor Business Licence issued or renewed under this section that the
                     Minister considers necessary for the protection of human health or the
                     environment.
Expiry                 (7) A Domestic Pesticide Vendor Business Licence shall be issued on
                     Form 16 and expires
                         (a) on the last day of February of the year following the date of issue
                         of the licence; or
                         (b) on the date on which the licensee no longer holds, or employs at
                         least one person who holds, a Domestic Pesticide Vendor
                         Certificate,
                         whichever occurs earlier. (EC71/07)
Non-domestic         14. (1) The Minister may, on application, issue a Non-domestic Pesticide
Pesticide Vendor     Vendor Certificate to a person who has successfully completed a written
Certificate
                     examination, approved by the Director, with a mark in the examination
                     of not less than 75%.
Conditions             (2) The Minister may impose any conditions on a Non-domestic
                     Pesticide Vendor Certificate issued under this section that the Minister
                     considers necessary for the protection of human health or the
                     environment.
Expiry                 (3) A Non-domestic Pesticide Vendor Certificate shall be issued on
                     Form 3 of Schedule 3 and expires five years from the date of
                     examination. (EC761/05; 71/07)
Domestic Pesticide   14.1 (1) The Minister may, on application, issue a Domestic Pesticide
Vendor Certificate   Vendor Certificate to a person who has successfully completed a written
                     examination, approved by the Director, with a mark in the examination
                     of not less than 75%.
Conditions             (2) The Minister may impose any conditions on a Domestic Pesticide
                     Vendor Certificate issued under this section that the Minister considers
                     necessary for the protection of human health or the environment.



                                                          16
Updated 2010                Pesticides Control Act                  Cap. P-4                     17
                                 Regulations


  (3) A Domestic Pesticide Vendor Certificate shall be issued on Form
                                                                               Expiry
17 and expires five years from the date of the examination referred to in
subsection (1). (EC71/07)
15. (1) Where, in the opinion of the Minister, a holder of a licence,          Revocation of
certificate or permit has contravened a provision of the Act or these          licence, certificate
                                                                               or permit
regulations or a condition of the licence, certificate or permit, the
Minister may revoke the licence, certificate or permit.
                                                                               Notice of
  (2) Notice of the revocation of a licence, certificate or permit pursuant    revocation
to subsection (1) may be given by
     (a) personal service; or
     (b) by registered mail to the last known address of the holder of the
     licence, certificate or permit as shown in the records of the Minister.
  (3) A notice mailed pursuant to clause (2)(b) shall be deemed to be          Deemed service
served on the holder of the licence or certificate
    (a) on the date the holder of the licence or certificate actually
    receives the notice; or
    (b) 5 days after the date on which the notice was mailed,
whichever is earlier. (EC761/05; 290/08)
16. (1) The Minister may, on application, issue a Pesticide Purchase           Pesticide Purchase
Permit to a holder of a Pesticide Application Business Licence or to the       Permit

operator of an agricultural operation or golf course that employs at least
one person who holds a Pesticide Applicator Certificate.
 (2) A Pesticide Purchase Permit expires                                       Expiry
    (a) on December 31 of the year in which the Permit was issued;
    (b) on the expiry date of the Pesticide Applicator Certificate of the
    individual listed as the certified applicator on the Pesticide Purchase
    Permit application form submitted pursuant to subsection (1); or
    (c) on the date when the operator of the agricultural operation or
    golf course ceases to employ the individual listed as the certified
    applicator on the Pesticide Purchase Permit application form
    submitted pursuant to subsection (1),
whichever is earlier. (EC761/05; 313/06; 71/07)
17. (1) A person who sells a non-domestic pesticide shall prepare a            Record of sale
written record of sale within 24 hours of the sale indicating the name,
number and expiry date on the purchaser’s Pesticide Applicator
Certificate or Pesticide Purchase Permit.
  (2) A person who sells a Schedule 1 pesticide shall prepare a written        Idem
record of sale within 24 hours of the sale indicating the
    (a) name, number and expiry date on the purchaser’s Pesticide
    Applicator Certificate or Pesticide Purchase Permit; and


                                     17
18                   Cap. P-4                    Pesticides Control Act             Updated 2010
                                                      Regulations


                          (b) number of the purchaser’s Pesticide Application Permit.
                          (EC761/05)
Authorize employee   18. (1) An operator of an agricultural operation or a golf course, or a
to use permit        holder of a Pesticide Application Business Licence may, in writing,
                     authorize an employee to use a Pesticide Purchase Permit issued under
                     subsection 16(1) for the purpose of purchasing a non-domestic pesticide
                     for the use of the operator of the agricultural operation or a golf course,
                     or the holder of a Pesticide Application Business Licence.
Expiry of              (2) An authorization under subsection (1) expires on the date that
authorization            (a) is specified on the authorization;
                         (b) the employee is no longer employed by the operator of the
                         agricultural operation or a golf course, or the holder of a Pesticide
                         Application Business Licence; or
                         (c) the operator of the agricultural operation or a golf course, or the
                         holder of a Pesticide Application Business Licence rescinds the
                         authorization.
Permit to be           (3) An employee who is no longer authorized to use a Pesticide
returned             Purchase Permit shall return the Permit immediately to the operator of
                     the agricultural operation or a golf course, or the holder of a Pesticide
                     Application Business Licence. (EC761/05; 290/08)
Pesticide            19. (1) Subject to subsection (2), the Minister may, on application, issue
Application Permit   a Pesticide Application Permit to a person who
                          (a) has submitted the application at least ten days prior to the
                          planned date of pesticide application; and
                          (b) has provided such information as the Minister may request.
Use limited in         (2) A Pesticide Application Permit for use in a buffer zone may only
buffer zone          be issued under subsection (1) for the purpose of controlling noxious
                     weeds.
Form, contents of      (3) A Pesticide Application Permit shall be in such form and contain
permit               such particulars as the Minister may determine and expires on the date
                     shown on the permit.
Make copy of           (4) Every person who holds a Pesticide Application Permit shall,
permit available     immediately upon the request of an environment officer, make available
                     a copy of that Permit to that environment officer. (EC761/05)
Separate storage     20. (1) Every person who
from food                 (a) keeps or stores a pesticide; or
                          (b) has kept or stored a pesticide,
                     shall do so in a manner that ensures that the pesticide or any container
                     that holds a pesticide is kept and stored separately from any foodstuffs,


                                                          18
Updated 2010                 Pesticides Control Act                  Cap. P-4                      19
                                  Regulations


feeds or any other material intended for consumption by humans or
animals.
   (2) Every operator of an agricultural operation, every operator of a golf    Storage facility
course, and every holder of a Pesticide Application Business Licence
who possess pesticides in amounts in excess of 100 kilograms or 100
litres of formulated product shall ensure that the pesticide is stored in a
storage facility that
     (a) is maintained and used exclusively for the storage of a pesticides;
     (b) is free of an accumulation of waste materials other than pesticide
     containers;
     (c) has a floor constructed
         (i) of concrete or other water-impervious material that
             (A) is recessed by at least 10 centimetres from the entrance, or
             (B) has a liquid-tight sill that is raised by at least 10
             centimetres from the floor, and
         (ii) in a manner that will contain and control up to 150% of the
         volume of any liquid pesticide stored in the facility; or
     (d) has a separate containment unit that is constructed
         (i) of concrete or other water-impervious material, and
         (ii) in a manner that will contain and control up to 150% of the
         volume of any liquid pesticide stored in the containment unit;
     (e) provides adequate ventilation, either mechanical or natural;
     (f) has conspicuously placed ‘NO SMOKING’ signs;
     (g) has a sign that states ‘WARNING—PESTICIDE STORAGE
     AREA’ on all doors;
     (h) is not accessible to the public and is locked when the holder of
     the licence or an employee of the that person is not present on the
     premises on which the pesticide is stored;
     (i) has properly maintained and approved safety equipment to be
     used in emergency situations;
     (j) includes secure shelving, raised flooring, or otherwise provide for
     ‘off the floor’ product storage;
     (k) has no floor drainage;
     (l) is positioned not less than 8.0 metres from incompatible materials
     (e.g., fuels, fertilizers);
     (m) has posted, by the nearest phone, the following emergency
     telephone numbers:
         (i) 911 (fire, police, ambulance),
         (ii) provincial pesticide enforcement office,
         (iii) provincial or regional poison control centre,
         (iv) provincial environmental emergency office;
     (n) includes an up-to-date product storage inventory; and
     (o) includes, on-site, reference Material Safety Data Sheets
     (MSDSs) for all stored pesticides.


                                      19
20                     Cap. P-4                    Pesticides Control Act             Updated 2010
                                                        Regulations


                         (3) Revoked by EC189/10. (EC761/05; 71/07; 290/08; 189/10; 189/10)
Effective date
Duties of licensee     20.1 (1) Every person who holds a Domestic Pesticide Vendor Business
                       Licence or a Non-domestic Pesticide Vendor Business Licence and sells
                       controlled purchase domestic pesticides shall ensure that any display of
                       such pesticides
                           (a) is not accessible to any person other than the licensee or the
                           licensee’s employees; and
                           (b) is more than one metre away from any commodities that are
                           intended to be used as
                              (i) food for humans or animals,
                              (ii) household furnishings, or
                              (iii) toiletries, clothes, bedding or similar commodities.
Storage of pesticide     (2) No person who holds a Domestic Pesticide Vendor Business
                       Licence or a Non-domestic Pesticide Vendor Business Licence shall
                       store a controlled purchase domestic pesticide unless
                            (a) such pesticides are accessible only to a person who
                               (i) is the licensee or an employee of the licensee, or
                               (ii) has been given express permission by the licensee to enter the
                               pesticide storage compartment, room or structure;
                            (b) the compartment, room or structure in which such pesticides are
                            stored is ventilated to the outside atmosphere;
                            (c) a placard is affixed and maintained on the outside of each door
                            leading into the compartment, room or structure in which the
                            pesticide is stored bearing, in clearly visible block letters,
                               (i) the words “Warning” and “Authorized Persons Only”, and
                               (ii) the words “Chemical Storage” or “Pesticide Storage”; and
                            (d) the compartment, room or structure in which the pesticide is
                            stored,
                               (i) does not have a drain that leads into or drains directly or
                               indirectly into a storm sewer, sanitary sewer or watercourse,
                               (ii) has, located nearby, adequate respiratory protection and
                               adequate protective clothing to be used for emergency purposes,
                               and
                               (iii) is more than one metre away from any commodities that are
                               intended to be used as
                                   (A) food for humans or animals,
                                   (B) household furnishings, or
                                   (C) toiletries, clothes, bedding or similar commodities.
                                   (EC71/07; 2010/89; 2010/89)
Selling pesticide      20.2 Every person who sells self-select domestic pesticides
                           (a) shall display or store such pesticides in a manner that ensures
                           that the pesticides do not present a hazard to children; and



                                                            20
Updated 2010                Pesticides Control Act                  Cap. P-4                     21
                                 Regulations


    (b) shall not display or store self-select domestic pesticides less than
    one metre away from any commodities that are intended to be used
    as
       (i) food for humans or animals,
       (ii) household furnishings, or
       (iii) toiletries, clothes, bedding or similar commodities. (EC71/07)
21. (1) Every person who handles, loads, transports, mixes or applies a        Permit to be carried,
Schedule 1 pesticide shall carry on their person a Pesticide Application       when

Permit at all times when the person is handling, loading, transporting,
mixing or applying the Schedule 1 pesticide.
  (2) Revoked by EC290/08. (EC761/05; 290/08)                                  Labels

22. Every person who applies, stores, handles, mixes, loads or transports      Package labels
a pesticide shall do so in the manner specified on the pesticide package
label. (EC761/05; 71/07)
22.1 Every person who holds a licence, certificate or permit issued under      Comply with terms,
these regulations shall comply with all terms or conditions placed on          conditions

such licence, certificate or permit. (EC71/07)
22.2 (1) Notwithstanding clause 28(2)(k), a person may apply a ready-          Ready-to-use
to-use herbicide using a wiper, brush or roller if the person                  herbicide

    (a) has completed training regarding the application of ready-to-use
    herbicides that was
       (i) approved by the Director,
       (ii) conducted in a language appropriate to that person, and
       (iii) provided or conducted by a person who holds a Class A or
       Class I Pesticide Applicator Certificate; and
    (b) is supervised, when applying the ready-to-use herbicide, by
    another person who
       (i) holds a Class A or Class I Pesticide Applicator Certificate,
       and
       (ii) is present at the site where the ready-to-use herbicide is being
       applied and is within direct sight of the person applying the
       ready-to-use herbicide.
  (2) A person who trains another person in the application of a ready-        Record of training
to-use herbicide using a wiper, brush or roller shall provide
    (a) the person, on the completion of the training; and
    (b) the employer, if any, of the person at the time the person
    completes the training,
with a written record of the training, which shall include
    (c) a description of the training completed;
    (d) the name of the person who was trained;


                                     21
22                   Cap. P-4                    Pesticides Control Act             Updated 2010
                                                      Regulations


                          (e) the date the training was completed; and
                          (f) the name of the person that performed the training.
Records retention      (3) An employer who, pursuant to subsection (2), receives a written
availability         record of the training of a person shall
                         (a) keep the written record for a period of at least three years from
                         the date the training was completed; and
                         (b) make the record available, on request, to any environment officer
                         appointed under the Environmental Protection Act, any
                         environmental health officer appointed under the Public Health Act
                         R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap. P-30, any medical practitioner registered
                         under the Medical Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap. M-5 or any
                         conservation officer appointed or designated under the Wildlife
                         Conservation Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap. W-4.1. (EC290/08)

                                                    OFFENCES
Disposal of          23. No person who disposes of
pesticide, etc            (a) a pesticide;
                          (b) a mixture containing a pesticide;
                          (c) a material treated with a pesticide,
                          (d) a container that held a pesticide,
                     shall carry out the disposal other than in the manner and using the
                     method recommended by the manufacturer or the Minister.
                     (EC761/0571/07)
Prior notice of      24. (1) No person shall apply a non-domestic pesticide for the control of
application          a landscape, structural, greenhouse or soil-based pest unless the person
                     has provided notice, in accordance with subsection (2), to all persons
                     who own property that is located within 25 metres of the proposed
                     pesticide application, measured from the edge of the area to which the
                     pesticide is to be applied,
                          (a) in writing, at least 24 hours but not more than 48 hours prior to
                          the pesticide application; or
                          (b) by phone, at least 24 hours but not more than 48 hours prior to
                          the pesticide application and in writing immediately prior to the
                          pesticide application.
Contents of notice     (2) The notice required in subsection (1) shall include
                         (a) the trade name and PCP Act (Canada) Number of the pesticide
                         being applied;
                         (b) the active ingredient or ingredients of the pesticide or pesticides
                         being applied;
                         (c) the pest or pests for which control is being undertaken;
                         (d) the proposed date and time of the application;
                         (e) the name and phone number of the pesticide applicator; and


                                                          22
Updated 2010                Pesticides Control Act                  Cap. P-4                       23
                                 Regulations


    (f) the recommended caution interval and re-entry time, if such is
    available from the pesticide manufacturer, or as appears on the
    pesticide label. (EC761/05; 71/07)
25. (1) No person shall apply a non-domestic pesticide for the control of      Posting notices
a landscape, structural, greenhouse or soil-based pest unless,
immediately prior to the pesticide application, the person posts a notice,
in accordance with subsection (2), on the area to which the pesticide is to
be applied.
  (2) The notice required in subsection (1) shall include                      Contents of notice
    (a) the trade name and PCP Act (Canada) Number of the pesticide
    being applied;
    (b) the active ingredient or ingredients of the pesticide or pesticides
    being applied;
    (c) the pest or pests for which control is being undertaken;
    (d) the date and time, or proposed date and time, of the application;
    (e) the name and phone number of the pesticide applicator;
    (f) the recommended caution interval and re-entry time, if such is
    available from the pesticide manufacturer, or as appears on the
    pesticide label
and be posted on a sign or signs that
    (g) measure not less than 22 cm by 28 cm;
    (h) are constructed of weather-resistant materials;
    (i) have all the required information printed, in weather-resistant ink,
    on both sides of the sign; and
    (j) are positioned in such a manner, and in such quantity, as to make
    them clearly visible to the public.
  (3) No person shall apply a pesticide to, or within, a structure, or         Signs at entrances
engage in the fumigation of a structure, unless the person first ensures       and exits

that signs, in accordance with subsection (2), are posted at all entrances
and exits to the structure.
  (4) Every owner of a property on which notice is posted under                Owner to ensure
subsection (1) shall ensure that all posted signs remain in place and are      notices remain for
                                                                               48 hours
clearly visible to the general public for a period of at least 48 hours
following the pesticide application, or for the label-recommended
caution period, whichever is greater. (EC761/05; 71/07)
26. No person who holds a Non-domestic Pesticide Vendor Business               Storage of
Licence shall store pesticides in a facility other than a Phase III storage    pesticides

facility. (EC761/05)
27. (1) No person shall transport in, or on, a vehicle a pesticide together    Transportation of
with commodities that are                                                      pesticide




                                     23
24                  Cap. P-4                     Pesticides Control Act              Updated 2010
                                                      Regulations


                         (a) foodstuffs, feeds or any other material intended for consumption
                         by humans or animals;
                         (b) household furnishings; or
                         (c) toiletries, clothes, bedding or similar commodities,
                    unless the pesticide being transported is separated from such
                    commodities in a manner sufficient to prevent their contamination or
                    likely contamination by the concentrated pesticide.
Idem                  (2) Every person who transports a concentrated non-domestic pesticide
                    in, or on, a vehicle shall ensure that
                         (a) such pesticide is packaged in the original manufacturer’s sealed
                         container in a manner that will ensure that the pesticide will not spill
                         out of the container; and
                         (b) the container referred to in clause (a) is
                            (i) enclosed within a leak-proof compartment that is separate
                            from, but securely affixed to the vehicle, or
                            (ii) secured to the vehicle by straps or other appropriate means
                            that render the pesticide safe for transport.
Exception             (3) Clause 2(b) does not apply to a concentrated non-domestic
                    pesticide packaged in a manufacturer’s drum, or to other bulk containers
                    if they are secured to the transport vehicle in accordance with the
                    Highway Traffic Act Commercial Vehicle (Cargo Securement)
                    Regulations.
Equipment to be       (4) Every person who owns, or has possession of, pesticide application
locked              equipment shall ensure that the equipment is locked while unattended.
Transports, sells     (5) Every person who
treated seed             (a) transports seed treated with a pesticide; or
                         (b) sells or supplies seed treated with a pesticide to any other person,
                    shall label all containers of such seed with the words “Seed treated with -
                    (name of pesticide). Do not use for food or feed”. (EC761/05; 313/06)
Licence mandatory   28. (1) No person shall
                         (a) operate ground agricultural equipment, if
                            (i) the person uses the equipment to apply a pesticide for a fee,
                            charge or other valuable consideration, and
                            (ii) fifty per cent or more of the annual usage of the equipment is
                            a use described in subclause (i),
                         unless the person holds a Class A Pesticide Application Business
                         Licence;
                         (b) offer a service involving the application of a pesticide for the
                         control of mosquitoes or biting flies unless the person holds a Class
                         B Pesticide Application Business Licence;



                                                          24
Updated 2010                Pesticides Control Act                   Cap. P-4                 25
                                 Regulations


    (c) offer a service involving the application of a non-fumigant
    pesticide to stored feed, or to dwellings or other structures unless the
    person holds a Class C-1 Pesticide Application Business Licence;
    (d) offer a service involving the application of a fumigant pesticide
    to stored feed, or to dwellings or other structures unless the person
    holds a Class C-2 Pesticide Application Business Licence;
    (e) offer a service involving the application of a seed or seed-piece
    treatment pesticide unless the person holds a Class D Pesticide
    Application Business Licence;
    (f) offer a service involving the application of a pesticide to
    ornamental vegetation, golf course turf and other non-crop areas not
    referred to in clause (c) or (d) unless the person holds a Class E
    Pesticide Application Business Licence;
    (g) offer a pesticide application service for forestry herbicide
    application unless the person holds a Class F-1 Pesticide Application
    Business Licence;
    (h) offer a service involving the application of a pesticide for the
    production of tree seedlings for reforestation purposes unless the
    person holds a Class F-2 Pesticide Application Business Licence;
    (i) offer a service involving the application of a pesticide in a
    greenhouse unless the person offering such service holds a Class G
    Pesticide Application Business Licence, or a Class F-2 Pesticide
    Application Business Licence;
    (j) offer a service involving the application of a soil fumigant
    pesticide unless the person holds a Class H Pesticide Application
    Business Licence; and
    (k) offer a pesticide application service for the application of a
    herbicide using a wiper, brush or roller, or by making a spot
    treatment , unless the person holds a Class I Pesticide Application
    Business Licence;
    (l) offer a pesticide application service not specified in clauses (a) to
    (k), unless the person holds a Class J Pesticide Application Business
    Licence.
  (2) No person shall                                                           Certificate
    (a) apply a non-domestic pesticide to control pests                         mandatory

       (i) on agricultural land, or
       (ii) on an agricultural crop or product that is not located in a
       greenhouse,
    unless the person holds a Class A Pesticide Applicator Certificate;
    (b) apply a non-domestic pesticide to control mosquitoes or biting
    flies unless the person holds a Class B Pesticide Applicator
    Certificate;




                                     25
26                     Cap. P-4                    Pesticides Control Act             Updated 2010
                                                        Regulations


                            (c) apply a non-domestic, non-fumigant pesticide to stored feed,
                            dwellings or other structures unless the person holds a Class C-1
                            Pesticide Applicator Certificate;
                            (d) apply a fumigant pesticide to stored feed, dwellings or other
                            structures unless the person holds a Class C-2 Pesticide Applicator
                            Certificate;
                            (e) apply a non-domestic pesticide as a seed or seed-piece treatment
                            unless the person holds a Class D Pesticide Applicator Certificate;
                            (f) apply a non-domestic pesticide to ornamental vegetation, golf
                            course turf and other non-crop areas not referred to in clause (c) or
                            (d) unless the person holds a Class E Pesticide Applicator
                            Certificate;
                            (g) apply a non-domestic forestry herbicide unless the person holds a
                            Class F-1 Pesticide Applicator Certificate;
                            (h) apply a non-domestic pesticide for the production of tree
                            seedlings for reforestation purposes unless the person holds a Class
                            F-2 Pesticide Applicator Certificate;
                            (i) apply a non-domestic pesticide in a greenhouse, other than a
                            person who holds a Class F-2 licence unless the person holds a Class
                            G Pesticide Applicator Certificate;
                            (j) apply a soil fumigant pesticide unless the person holds a Class H
                            Pesticide Applicator Certificate; and
                            (k) apply a herbicide using a wiper, brush or roller, or by making a
                            spot treatment, unless the person holds a Class I Pesticide Applicator
                            Certificate; and
                            (l) apply a non-domestic pesticide for any purpose not specified in
                            clauses (a) to (k) unless the person holds a Class J Pesticide
                            Applicator Certificate. (EC761/05; 313/06; 71/07; 290/08)
Licence mandatory      28.1 No person shall operate a business involving the sale or supply of a
                       controlled purchase domestic pesticide unless the person holds a
                       Domestic Pesticide Vendor Business Licence or a Non-domestic
                       Pesticide Vendor Business Licence. (EC71/07)
Mixing pesticide       29. No person shall mix a non-domestic pesticide unless the person
                           (a) holds a Loader/mixer Certificate; or
                           (b) holds a Pesticide Applicator Certificate. (EC761/05; 313/06;
                           71/07; 290/08)
Licence mandatory      30. No person shall operate a business involving the sale or supply of a
                       non-domestic pesticide unless the person holds a Non-domestic Pesticide
                       Vendor Business Licence.
Certificate required   30.1 No person shall
                           (a) sell, or offer to sell, a controlled purchase domestic pesticide to
                           another person; or


                                                            26
Updated 2010                Pesticides Control Act                 Cap. P-4                      27
                                 Regulations


    (b) provide pesticide related information or recommendations
    regarding controlled purchase domestic pesticides to another person,
unless the person selling or offering to sell such pesticide, or providing
such information holds a Domestic Pesticide Vendor Certificate or a
Non-domestic Pesticide Vendor Certificate. (EC71/07)
31. (1) No person shall sell a non-domestic pesticide or a Schedule 1         Certificate required
pesticide to any person unless the person holds a Non-domestic Pesticide
Vendor Certificate.
                                                                              Information or
   (2) No person, while acting as an employee of a business that is           recommendations
licensed to sell non-domestic pesticides, shall provide pesticide related
information or recommendations to another person unless the person
holds a Non-domestic Pesticide Vendor Certificate. (EC761/05)
32. (1) No person shall sell or offer to sell a non-domestic pesticide to a   Certificate, permit
purchaser unless the purchaser                                                or licence
                                                                              mandatory
     (a) holds a Pesticide Applicator Certificate;
     (b) holds or is authorized to use a Pesticide Purchase Permit; or
     (c) holds a Pesticide Applicator Business Licence.
  (2) No person shall purchase a non-domestic pesticide unless the            Certificate or permit
person holds                                                                  mandatory

    (a) a Pesticide Applicator Certificate; or
    (b) is authorized to use a Pesticide Purchase Permit.
  (3) No person shall purchase a Schedule 1 pesticide unless the person       Idem
    (a) holds a Pesticide Applicator Certificate or is authorized to use a
    Pesticide Purchase Permit; and
    (b) holds a Pesticide Application Permit.
  (4) No person shall sell or offer to sell a Schedule 1 pesticide to a       Idem
purchaser unless the purchaser
    (a) holds a Pesticide Applicator Certificate, is authorized to use a
    Pesticide Purchase Permit or holds a Pesticide Applicator Business
    Licence; and
    (b) holds a Pesticide Application Permit. (EC761/05)
33. No person authorized under section 18 to use a Pesticide Purchase         Permit not to be
Permit shall use the Permit for any purpose other than to purchase a non-     used for another
                                                                              purpose
domestic pesticide for the use of the person authorizing the use of the
permit. (EC761/05; 290/08)
34. No person shall give, transfer, sell, lend or assign a Pesticide          Permit not
Purchase Permit to any other person, except as authorized by the              transferable

Director, in writing, or by an operator or a holder under section 18.
(EC761/05; 313/06)


                                     27
28                  Cap. P-4                    Pesticides Control Act             Updated 2010
                                                     Regulations


                    35. No person shall apply
”Prohibition
                        (a) a pesticide to any open body of water;
                        (b) a pesticide to control mosquitoes or biting flies;
                        (c) a pesticide within a buffer zone; or
                        (d) a pesticide listed in Schedule 1,
                    unless the person holds a Pesticide Application Permit. (EC761/05;
                    290/08)
No application of
Schedule 6          36. No person shall apply a pesticide that is listed in Schedule 6 of these
pesticide           regulations. (EC761/05)
No application by   37. No person shall use an aircraft to apply a pesticide or pesticide
aircraft            mixture. (EC761/05)
Filling, washing,   38. (1) No person shall permit or cause any sprayer or other equipment
etc. sprayer        used to apply pesticides to be
                         (a) filled, discharged, washed or flushed out within 25 metres of the
                         water’s edge of any open body of water; or
                         (b) discharged, washed or flushed out within 25 metres of a water
                         well.
Distance measured     (1.1) The distances referred to in subsection (1) shall be measured
horizontally        horizontally.
Idem                  (2) No person shall permit or cause any sprayer or other equipment
                    used to apply pesticides to be filled from an open body of water or a
                    water well.
Idem                  (3) No person shall permit or cause any container in which any
                    pesticide is, or has been stored, to be brought, used or abandoned within
                    25 metres, measured horizontally, of the water’s edge of any open body
                    of water. (EC761/05; 313/06)
Wind speed          39. (1) Subject to subsection (2), no person shall apply a pesticide,
                         (a) in a dry formulation; or
                         (b) in a liquid formulation that is under pressure,
                    when the wind speed, measured at the point of application, exceeds 20
                    km/h.
Exception             (2) Subsection (1) does not apply to the application of a herbicide
                    using a wiper, brush or roller. (EC761/05; 71/07)
Discharge in        40. No person shall allow any pesticide, pesticide mixture or solution
accordance with     containing a pesticide to be discharged from any equipment used in the
label
                    transport, storage or application of pesticides except in a manner
                    permitted by the manufacturer’s label. (EC761/05)




                                                         28
Updated 2010              Pesticides Control Act                Cap. P-4                 29
                               Regulations


40.1 (1) No person shall use pesticide products on a commercial golf
                                                                           Prohibition
course that contain any form of the chemical 2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic
Acid for the control of lawn pests within 25 metres of
    (a) a watercourse boundary or wetland boundary; or
    (b) the boundary of an adjacent property used for commercial,
    industrial, residential or institutional purposes.
  (2) Where a person applies a pesticide product containing any form of    Restriction
the chemical 2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic Acid on a commercial golf
course for the control of lawn pests, the person shall only apply the
product on,
    (a) fairways;
    (b) tee-off areas; and
    (c) greens. (EC189/10)

40.2 No person shall sell, supply or use any domestic pesticide for the    Prohibition

control of lawn pests that
    (a) is a fertilizer-pesticide blended product;
    (b) is a granular spreadable pesticide;
    (c) is a hose-end pesticide;
    (d) is a pesticide concentrate; or
    (e) contains the chemical 2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic Acid.
    (EC189/10)
41. The Pesticides Control Act Regulations (EC543/84) are revoked.         Revocation
(EC761/05)




                                   29
30   Cap. P-4                  Pesticides Control Act          Updated 2010
                                    Regulations



                                SCHEDULE 1
                  PESTICIDES FOR WHICH A PERMIT IS REQUIRED

     1. Dinoseb 300 EC                                  PCP Act No. 15086
     2. Vecto Bac 200 G                                 PCP Act No. 18158
     3. Vecto Bac 600L                                  PCP Act No. 19455
     4. Vecto Bac 1200L                                 PCP Act No. 8106
     5. Guthion Spray Concentrate                       PCP Act No. 21062
     6. Guthion Spray Concentrate Insecticide           PCP Act No. 9398
     7. Guthion 50% WP Crop Insecticide                 PCP Act No. 10101
     8. Azinphos Methyl 50W Wettable Powder 50%         PCP Act No. 15645
     9. APM 50W Wettable Powder Insecticide             PCP Act No. 16412
     10. Azinphos Methyl 240 EC                         PCP Act No. 17533
     11. Guthion Solupak                                PCP Act No. 21374
     12. Clean Crop Azinphos-M 50W                      PCP Act No. 22087
     13. Azinphos Methyl 35W                            PCP Act No. 22265
     14. Clean Crop Azinphos-M 240 EC                   PCP Act No. 22562
     15. APM 50W Instapak                               PCP Act No. 22864
     16. Sniper 50W                                     PCP Act No. 23287
     17. Sniper 50W Clean Pak                           PCP Act No. 23323
     18. Sniper 240 E                                   PCP Act No. 23337
     19. Vapam Liquid Solution Soil Fumigant            PCP Act No. 6453
     20. Terr-o-gas 67 Preplant Soil Fumigant           PCP Act No. 13477
     21. BASF Basamid Granular (Soil Fumigant)          PCP Act No. 15032
     22. Busan 1020                                     PCP Act No. 19421
     23. TCC Methyl Bromide Fumigant                    PCP Act No. 19498
     24. BASF Metam Fluid 380 G/L                       PCP Act No. 19556
     25. Chloropicrin 100 Liquid Soil Fumigant          PCP Act No. 25863
     (EC761/05)




                                        30
Updated 2010                       Pesticides Control Act                            Cap. P-4    31
                                        Regulations



                                   SCHEDULE 2
                               EXCLUDED PESTICIDES

Pesticides are designated as excluded pesticides, where the pesticide is used
      (a) as a bactericide in cutting oils or aviation and marine fuels;
      (b) in household or agricultural
             (i) cleansers,
             (ii) deodorizers,
             (iii) disinfectants, or
             (iv) soaps;
      (c) as a dust control agent;
      (d) as a fabric softener;
      (e) as a bactericide or algaecide for use in swimming pools, domestic water supplies,
      industrial cooling systems, home aquaria, aquaculture facilities, or ornamental pools;
      (f) as a surfactant, preservative or adjuvant;
      (g) as wood preservatives;
      (h) as bait or attractant for flies or biting insects, powder or liquid formulations for
      lice or barn spray;
      (i) in pesticide analysis and research work in a laboratory or experimental research
      plot;
      (j) in an industrial process incorporating a pesticide into a manufactured product on
      the premises where the product is manufactured;
      (k) by medical practitioners, veterinarians or health officers for the purpose of
      treatment, control, mitigation or prevention of pests in or on humans or animals; or
      (l) as a mechanism to repel, attract or otherwise control or kill nuisance insects.
      (EC761/05; 71/07; 290/08; 417/10)




                                             31
32     Cap. P-4                                                Pesticides Control Act                                          Updated 2010
                                                                    Regulations


                                                                     SCHEDULE 3

                                                                               FORMS

                                              FORM 1 – LOADER/MIXER CERTIFICATE


                                                    LOADER/MIXER CERTIFICATE



     Name: .........................................................................................
     Address: .....................................................................................
     .....................................................................................................           Photo here
     Phone: ........................................................................................
     Certificate Number: ...................................................................
     Expiry Date: ...............................................................................
     Authorized Signature: ................................................................


       (EC761/05)

                     FORM 2 –NON-DOMESTIC PESTICIDE VENDOR BUSINESS LICENSE


                                               Province of Prince Edward Island
                                        Department of Environment, Energy and Forestry

                                                           Non-Domestic Pesticide
                                                           Vendor Business Licence


                                                            This certifies that
                                                 a licence was issued by the Minister to

                                                                  (Company Name)

                                                    to sell pesticides in the Province of
                                                            Prince Edward Island
                                                        pursuant to section 13 of the
                                                    Pesticides Control Act regulations.

     Licence Number: .......................................................................................................................
     Issue Date: .................................................................................................................................
     Expiry Date: ..............................................................................................................................
     Authorized Signature .................................................................................................................

       (EC761/05)




                                                                               32
  Updated 2010                                            Pesticides Control Act                                                  Cap. P-4      33
                                                               Regulations



                                            FORM 3 – NON-DOMESTIC PESTICIDE
                                                 VENDOR CERTIFICATE


                           NON-DOMESTIC PESTICIDE VENDOR CERTIFICATE



Name: .........................................................................................
Address: .....................................................................................
....................................................................................................           Photo here
Phone: ........................................................................................
Certificate Number: ...................................................................
Expiry Date: ...............................................................................
Authorized Signature: ................................................................


  (EC761/05)

                          FORM 4 - PESTICIDE APPLICATION BUSINESS LICENCE


                                          Province of Prince Edward Island
                                   Department of Environment, Energy and Forestry

                                          Pesticide Application Business Licence


                                                       This certifies that
                                            a licence was issued by the Minister to

                                                            (Company Name)

                                           to operate a (Class of Licence) pesticide
                                                   application service in the
                                              Province of Prince Edward Island
                                                 pursuant to section 5 of the
                                              Pesticides Control Act regulations.

Licence Number: .......................................................................................................................
Issue Date: .................................................................................................................................
Expiry Date: ...............................................................................................................................
Authorized Signature: ................................................................................................................

  (EC761/05)




                                                                          33
34     Cap. P-4                                                Pesticides Control Act                                                Updated 2010
                                                                    Regulations



                                      FORM 5 - PESTICIDE APPLICATOR CERTIFICATE


                                            PESTICIDE APPLICATOR CERTIFICATE



     Contact Name: ...........................................................................
     Address: .....................................................................................
     .....................................................................................................                Photo here
     Phone: ........................................................................................
     Applicator Class: ........................................................................
     Certificate Number: ...................................................................
     Expiry Date: ...............................................................................
     Authorized Signature: ................................................................


       (EC761/05)

                                             FORM 6 – PESTICIDE PURCHASE PERMIT


                                                   PESTICIDE PURCHASE PERMIT

     Company Name: .......................................................................................................................
     Contact Name: ..........................................................................................................................
     Address: ....................................................................................................................................
     ....................................................................................................................................................
     Phone: .......................................................................................................................................
     Certificate Number: ..................................................................................................................
     Expiry Date: ..............................................................................................................................
     Authorized Signature: ...............................................................................................................

       (EC761/05)




                                                                               34
 Updated 2010                        Pesticides Control Act                           Cap. P-4     35
                                          Regulations



                                           FORM 7

       APPLICATION FOR PESTICIDE APPLICATION BUSINESS LICENCE

 Under section 28 of the Pesticide Control Act Regulations, a person who operates a
 business or provides a service that involves the application of a domestic or non-domestic
 pesticide for a fee must hold a Pesticide Application Business Licence.

 Personal information on this form is collected under section 5 of the Pesticide Control Act
 Regulations as it relates directly to and is necessary for an application for a Pesticide
 Application Business Licence. If you have any questions about this collection of personal
 information, you may contact the Manager of the Pesticide Regulatory Program, 11 Kent
 Street, Jones Building, Charlottetown, PEI C1A 7N8, Phone: (902) 368-5474.

Applicant Contact Information
Company Name:
Contact Name:
Phone:                                         Fax:
Mailing Address:

Postal Code:                                    Email:

 Applicant’s Signature: ________________________ Date: _______________________
 (Where applicant is a partnership or a corporation, the signature of a partner, or an
 authorized officer of the corporation is required.)

Licence Class – check one
o Class A, Agricultural – operating ground agricultural equipment for pesticide application
o Class B, Mosquito & Biting Fly - application of a pesticide for the control of mosquitoes or
     biting flies
o Class C-1, Structural - application of a non-fumigant pesticide to stored feed, dwellings or
     other structures
o Class C-2, Structural Fumigation - application of a fumigant pesticide to stored feed,
   dwellings or other structures
o Class D, Seed/Seed-piece Treatment - application of a seed or seed-piece treatment
   pesticide
o Class E, Landscape - application of a pesticide to ornamental vegetation
o Class F-1, Forestry Herbicides - forestry herbicide application
o Class F-2, Reforestation - application of a pesticide for the production of tree seedlings for
   reforestation purposes
o Class G, Greenhouse - application of a pesticide in greenhouses
o Class H, Soil Fumigation - application of a soil fumigant pesticide
o Class I, Manual Herbicide Treatment - application of a herbicide using a wiper, brush, roller
   or by spot treatment
  Class J, Other - other pesticide applications

o New Applicant              o Renewal of Licence
                              Present Licence Number:
Certified Applicator Information (Pesticide Applicator Certificate Holder)
Name:
Phone:                                      Fax:
Mailing Address:




                                               35
36    Cap. P-4                           Pesticides Control Act                      Updated 2010
                                              Regulations


     Postal Code:                                   Email:
     Certified Applicator Status:   o Owner of Company o Employee of Company
     Certificate Class and No.:
     Certificate Expiry Date:

      Signature of Certified Applicator: ______________________ Date:__________________
          (if not company owner)

      iThe application fee for a Pesticide Application Business Licence is $200 per licence
      iA separate application is required for each licence applied for
      iA copy of the insurance policy required by clause 5(1)(a) of the regulations
       (limited pollution liability and general public liability) must accompany all applications

      Method of Payment                 Please forward application and payment to:
      (Check appropriate box)           Department of Environment, Energy and Forestry
      o Cheque                          Pollution Prevention Division
      o Money Order                     Pesticide Regulatory Program
      o Cash or Debit Card              PO Box 2000, 11 Kent Street
      o Credit Card                     Charlottetown, PE C1A 7N8
      Amount Enclosed: $_______         Tel: (902) 368-5474

      Cheques or money orders should be made payable to the Minister of Finance and
      Municipal Affairs. Pesticide Application Business Licences will be mailed to the
      applicant’s address above. Please allow two weeks for delivery.
      (EC761/05; 290/08; 189/10)




                                                   36
 Updated 2010                       Pesticides Control Act                           Cap. P-4   37
                                         Regulations



                                          FORM 8

           APPLICATION FOR PESTICIDE APPLICATOR CERTIFICATE

 Under subsection 28(2) of the Pesticide Control Act Regulations, a person who applies a
 non-domestic pesticide must hold a Pesticide Applicator Certificate.

 Personal information on this form is collected under section 6 of the Pesticide Control Act
 Regulations as it relates directly to and is necessary for an application for a Pesticide
 Applicator Certificate. If you have any questions about this collection of personal
 information, you may contact the Manager of the Pesticide Regulatory Program, 11 Kent
 Street, Jones Building, Charlottetown, PEI C1A 7N8, Phone: (902) 368-5474.

Applicant Contact Information
Name:
Phone:                                        Fax:
Mailing Address:

Postal Code:                                   Email:
Are you over the age of 18?     Yes o No o

 Applicant’s Signature: ________________________         Date: _______________________

Certificate Class – check one




                                              37
38    Cap. P-4                            Pesticides Control Act                      Updated 2010
                                               Regulations



     o Class A, Agricultural – operating ground agricultural equipment for pesticide application
     o Class B, Mosquito & Biting Fly - application of a pesticide for the control of mosquitoes
        or biting flies
     o Class C-1, Structural - application of a non-fumigant pesticide to stored feed, dwellings
        or other structures
     o Class C-2, Structural Fumigation - application of a fumigant pesticide to stored feed,
        dwellings or other structures
     o Class D, Seed/Seed-piece Treatment -     application of a seed or seed-piece treatment
        pesticide
     o Class E, Landscape - application of a pesticide to ornamental vegetation
     o Class F-1, Forestry Herbicides - forestry herbicide application
     o Class F-2, Reforestation - application of a pesticide for the production of tree seedlings
        for reforestation purposes
     o Class G, Greenhouse - application of a pesticide in greenhouses
     o Class H, Soil Fumigation - application of a soil fumigant pesticide
     o Class I, Manual Herbicide Treatment - application of a herbicide using a wiper, brush,
        roller or by spot treatment
      Class J, Other - other pesticide applications
     Office Use Only
     Examination Date:
     Examination Mark:
     Certificate Status:
                                o Approved             o Denied
      iThe application fee for a Pesticide Applicator Certificate is $75
      iA separate application is required for each certificate
      iPrior to a certificate being issued , the applicant must successfully complete a written
       examination appropriate to the class of certificate applied for, with a mark in the
       examination of not less than 75%


      Method of Payment                  Please forward application and payment to:
      (Check appropriate box)            Department of Environment, Energy and Forestry
      o Cheque                           Pollution Prevention Division
      o Money Order                      Pesticide Regulatory Program
      o Cash or Debit Card               PO Box 2000, 11 Kent Street
      o Credit Card                      Charlottetown, PE C1A 7N8
      Amount Enclosed: $_________        Tel: (902) 368-5474

      Cheques or money orders should be made payable to the Minister of Finance and
      Municipal Affairs. Pesticide Applicator Certificates will be mailed to applicant’s
      address above. Please allow two weeks for delivery.
      (EC761/05; 290/08; 189/10)




                                                    38
 Updated 2010                       Pesticides Control Act                           Cap. P-4   39
                                         Regulations



                                          FORM 9

                APPLICATION FOR LOADER/MIXER CERTIFICATE

 Under clauses 29(1)(a) and (2)(a) of the Pesticide Control Act Regulations, a person who
 transports or mixes a non-domestic pesticide must hold a Loader/Mixer Certificate or other
 certificate identified in section 29.

 Personal information on this form is collected under section 10 of the Pesticide Control Act
 Regulations as it relates directly to and is necessary for an application for a Loader/Mixer
 Certificate. If you have any questions about this collection of personal information, you
 may contact the Manager of the Pesticide Regulatory Program, 11 Kent Street, Jones
 Building, Charlottetown, PEI C1A 7N8, Phone: (902) 368-5474.

Applicant Contact Information
Name:
Phone:                                        Fax:
Mailing Address:

Postal Code:                                   Email:
Are you over the age of 18?     Yes o         No o

Applicant Experience
Describe successful completion of a relevant loader/mixer training program (include dates):




 Applicant’s Signature: ________________________         Date: _______________________

                    The application fee for a Loader/Mixer Certificate is $50

 Method of Payment                 Please forward application and payment to:
 (Check appropriate box)           Department of Environment, Energy and Forestry
 o Cheque                          Pollution Prevention Division
 o Money Order                     Pesticide Regulatory Program
 o Cash or Debit Card              PO Box 2000, 11 Kent Street
 o Credit Card                     Charlottetown, PE C1A 7N8
 Amount Enclosed: $_________       Tel: (902) 368-5474

 Cheques or money orders should be made payable to the Minister of Finance and
 Municipal Affairs. Loader/Mixer Certificates will be mailed to the applicant’s address
 above. Please allow two weeks for delivery.
 (EC761/05; 189/10)




                                              39
40    Cap. P-4                           Pesticides Control Act                     Updated 2010
                                              Regulations



                                               FORM 10

           APPLICATION FOR NON-DOMESTIC PESTICIDE VENDOR BUSINESS
                                  LICENCE

      Under section 30 of the Pesticide Control Act Regulations, a person who operates a
      business involving the sale or supply of non-domestic pesticides must hold a Non-Domestic
      Pesticide Vendor Business Licence.

      Personal information on this form is collected under section 13 of the Pesticide Control Act
      Regulations as it relates directly to and is necessary for an application for a Non-Domestic
      Pesticide Vendor Business Licence. If you have any questions about this collection of
      personal information, you may contact the Manager of the Pesticide Regulatory Program,
      11 Kent Street, Jones Building, Charlottetown, PEI C1A 7N8, Phone: (902) 368-5474.

     Applicant Contact Information
     Company Name:
     Contact Name:
     Phone:                                        Fax:
     Mailing Address:

     Postal Code:                                   Email:

      Applicant’s Signature: ________________________ Date: _______________________
      (Where applicant is a partnership or a corporation, the signature of a partner, or an
      authorized officer of the corporation is required).

     Licence Details

     o New Applicant             o Renewal of Licence
                                   Present Licence Number:
     Type of Sales to be made (check all that apply) :   o Retail          o Wholesale
     Storage Facility
     CropLife Canada Phase III Compliance Number:
     Status of Storage Facility: o Own o Lease o Other (specify):
     Certified Vendor Information (Non-Domestic Pesticide Vendor Certificate Holder)
     Name:
     Phone:                                     Fax:
     Mailing Address:

     Postal Code:                                   Email:
     Certified Vendor Status:   o Owner of Company o Employee of Company
     Certificate Expiry Date:

      Signature of Certified Vendor: ______________________ Date:_____________________
          (if not company owner)




                                                   40
Updated 2010                     Pesticides Control Act                         Cap. P-4    41
                                      Regulations


The application fee for a Non-Domestic Pesticide Vendor Business Licence is as follows:
       ° where up to 10,000 kg of active ingredients sold in the previous year - $100
       ° where between 10,001 kg and 30,000 kg of active ingredients sold in the previous
       ° year - $500
       ° where between 30,001 kg and 50,000 kg of active ingredients sold in the previous
       ° year - $1,000
       ° where over 50,000 kg of active ingredients sold in the previous year - $2,500
The sales data for all domestic and non-domestic pesticides sold to retail customers for
the previous calendar year must be included with the application.

Method of Payment           Please forward application and payment to:
(Check appropriate box)     Department of Environment, Energy and Forestry
o Cheque                    Pollution Prevention Division
o Money Order               Pesticide Regulatory Program
o Cash or Debit Card        PO Box 2000, 11 Kent Street
o Credit Card               Charlottetown, PE C1A 7N8
Amount Enclosed: $_________ Tel: (902) 368-5474

Cheques or money orders should be made payable to the Minister of Finance and
Municipal Affairs. Non-Domestic Pesticide Vendor Certificates will be mailed to the
applicant’s address above. Please allow two weeks for delivery.
(EC761/05; 189/10)




                                           41
42    Cap. P-4                           Pesticides Control Act                      Updated 2010
                                              Regulations



                                               FORM 11

        APPLICATION FOR NON-DOMESTIC PESTICIDE VENDOR CERTIFICATE

      Under section 31 of the Pesticide Control Act Regulations, a person who sells non-domestic
      pesticides or Schedule 1 pesticides, to another person or while acting as an employee of a
      business that is licensed to sell non-domestic pesticides or provide pesticide related
      information or recommendations to another person, must hold a Non-Domestic Pesticide
      Vendor Certificate.

      Personal information on this form is collected under section 14 of the Pesticide Control Act
      Regulations as it relates directly to and is necessary for an application for a Non-Domestic
      Pesticide Vendor Certificate. If you have any questions about this collection of personal
      information, you may contact the Manager of the Pesticide Regulatory Program, 11 Kent
      Street, Jones Building, Charlottetown, PEI C1A 7N8, Phone: (902) 368-5474.

     Applicant Contact Information
     Name:
     Phone:                                        Fax:
     Mailing Address:

     Postal Code:                                   Email:

      Applicant’s Signature: ________________________          Date: _______________________

     Office Use Only
     Examination Date:
     Examination Mark:
     Certificate Status:
                                      Approved o          Denied o

      iThe application fee for a Non-Domestic Pesticide Vendor Certificate is $75 per certificate
      iPrior to a certificate being issued , the applicant must successfully complete a written
      examination appropriate to the class of certificate applied for, with a mark in the examination
      of not less than 75%.

      Method of Payment                 Please forward application and payment to:
      (Check appropriate box)           Department of Environment, Energy and Forestry
      o Cheque                          Pollution Prevention Division
      o Money Order                     Pesticide Regulatory Program
      o Cash or Debit Card              PO Box 2000, 11 Kent Street
      o Credit Card                     Charlottetown, PE C1A 7N8
      Amount Enclosed: $_________       Tel: (902) 368-5474

      Cheques or money orders should be made payable to the Minister of Finance and
      Municipal Affairs. Non-Domestic Pesticide Vendor Certificates will be mailed to
      applicant’s address above. Please allow two weeks for delivery.
      (EC761/05; 189/10)




                                                   42
 Updated 2010                       Pesticides Control Act                           Cap. P-4   43
                                         Regulations



                                          FORM 12

                APPLICATION FOR PESTICIDE PURCHASE PERMIT

 Under section 32 of the Pesticide Control Act Regulations, a person who buys non-
 domestic pesticides must hold, or be authorized to use a Pesticide Purchase Permit or a
 licence or certificate identified in the section.

 Personal information on this form is collected under section 16 of the Pesticide Control Act
 Regulations as it relates directly to and is necessary for an application for a Pesticide
 Purchase Permit. If you have any questions about this collection of personal information,
 you may contact the Manager of the Pesticide Regulatory Program, 11 Kent Street, Jones
 Building, Charlottetown, PEI C1A 7N8, Phone: (902) 368-5474.

Applicant Information
Company Name:                                   Phone:
Contact Name:                                   Fax:
Mailing Address:

Number of Permits Requested:                    Postal Code:

Signature of Applicant ________________________________ Date _________________

Certified Applicator Information
Name:                                           Phone:
Mailing Address:                                Postal Code:

Pesticide Applicator Certificate No.:
Pesticide Applicator Class:
Pesticide Applicator Certificate Expiry Date:
Are you currently employed by the Applicant?             Yes o    No o

 Signature of Certified Applicator: __________________________ Date: ______________

iThe application fee for one or more Pesticide Purchase Permit is $50.
iPayment must be received by the Department before the application will be processed.

 Method of Payment           Please forward application and payment to:
 (Check appropriate box)     Department of Environment, Energy and Forestry
 o Cheque                    Pollution Prevention Division
 o Money Order               Pesticide Regulatory Program
 o Cash or Debit Card        PO Box 2000, 11 Kent Street
 o Credit Card               Charlottetown, PE C1A 7N8
 Amount Enclosed: $_________ Tel: (902) 368-5474

 Cheques or money orders should be made payable to the Minister of Finance and
 Municipal Affairs. Pesticide Purchase Permits will be mailed to agricultural operation
 address above.
 Please allow two weeks for delivery.
 (EC761/05; 290/08; 189/10)




                                              43
44       Cap. P-4                             Pesticides Control Act                   Updated 2010
                                                   Regulations


                                                   FORM 13

                      APPLICATION FOR PESTICIDE APPLICATION PERMIT

         Under section 35 of the Pesticide Control Act Regulations, a person who applies pesticides
         to an open body of water, to control mosquitoes or biting flies within a designated protected
         zone, or apply Schedule 1 pesticides must hold a Pesticide Application Permit.

         Personal information on this form is collected under section 19 of the Pesticide Control Act
         Regulations as it relates directly to and is necessary for an application for a Pesticide
         Application Permit. If you have any questions about this collection of personal information,
         you may contact the Manager of the Pesticide Regulatory Program, 11 Kent Street, Jones
         Building, Charlottetown, PEI C1A 7N8, Phone: (902) 368-5474.

     Section 1 - Applicant Contact Information
     Name:
     Phone:                                    Fax:
     Mailing Address:

     Postal Code:                                     Email:
     Section 2 – Complete for Mosquito & Biting Fly Control
     Type of Application:
     o New Permit               o Modification of Permit
                                   Existing Permit Number:
     Treatment Type:
     o Water Treatment                o Private Treatment
     o Land Treatment                 o Commercial Treatment
     Applicators/Certificates (list all applicators):

             Applicator Names              Pesticide Applicator                   Class
                                             Certificate No.




     Treatment Details:
     Treatment Pest to be         Pesticide      PCP No.      Proposed Proposed Total
                controlled        Name                        Date of   Rate of     Amount of
                                                              Treatment Application Pesticide
                                                                                    Used

     1
     2
     3
     4
     5


     Describe the process and level of community support for the program:




                                                       44
 Updated 2010                       Pesticides Control Act                          Cap. P-4   45
                                         Regulations


Are “Permission to Enter Private Property” authorizations required? Yes o No o
If “Yes”, include authorizations with application
Requirements:
A map (1:25,000 scale) must be attached and identify:
(a) all property lines, fields, and treatment areas; and
(b) all open bodies of water, as defined under the Prince Edward Island Pesticides Control
Act; saltwater environments and perimeter coastline.
Section 3 – Complete for Application to Open Body of Water
Type of Application:
 o New Permit                  o Modification of Permit
                                  Existing Permit Number:
Treatment Type:
 o Private Treatment         o Commercial Treatment
Pesticide Applicator Certificate
   Name:
   Number:
   Class:
   Expiry date:
Treatment Details:
Treat Total           Pest to be Pesticide PCP No.Proposed Proposed Total
ment Treatment controlled Name                           Date of   Rate of      Amount of
        Area                                             Treatment Application Pesticide
        Acres                                                                   Used
        Hectares
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Requirements:
A map (1:10,000 scale) must be attached and identify:
(a) all property lines, fields, and treatment areas; and
(b) all open bodies of water, as defined under the Prince Edward Island Pesticides Control
Act; saltwater environments and perimeter coastline.
  Section 4 – Complete for Schedule 1 Pesticides (Soil Fumigant Formulations)
  Type of Application:
     o New Permit                     o Modification of Permit
                                         Existing Permit Number:
  Pesticide Applicator Certificate
     Name:
     Number:
     Class:
     Expiry date:
  Treatment Details:
   Property     Field     Crop        Pesticide    PCP * No.    Total Treatment Area
   Identific    No.                   Name                      o  Acres
   ation No.
                                                                o  Hectares




                                              45
46   Cap. P-4                             Pesticides Control Act                        Updated 2010
                                               Regulations




     * Pest Control Product Registration Number

     Time of Proposed Treatment:
      o Spring proposed treatment date(s): ___________________________________
      o Fall      proposed treatment date(s): ___________________________________

     Distance to Wells/Residences:

      Property             Field No.           Distance (m) to   Distance (m) to   Distance (m) to
      Identification                           nearest well      nearest           nearest
      No.                                      (indicate         occupied          property line
                                               private or        habitation
                                               municipal)




     REQUIREMENTS:

       1. An Environmental Farm Plan must be completed for all owned properties.
       2. Product use must be in compliance with the product label, and with all additional
          legal requirements, including the PEI Environmental Protection Act and the PEI
          Agricultural Crop Rotation Act.
       3. A map (1:10,000 scale) must be attached and identify:
          a.    all property lines, fields, and treatment areas;
          b.    all occupied habitations within 1,000 metres of the treatment area;
          c.    all municipal and/or private drinking water wells within 1,000 metres of the
                treatment area; and
          d.    all open bodies of water, as defined under the PEI Pesticides Control Act;
                saltwater environments; and/or perimeter coastline.
       4. Application for a permit must be made at least 4 weeks in advance of anticipated or
          planned product application.

     Section 5 – Complete for Application to Designated Protected Zone
     Type of Application:
        o New Permit               o Modification of Permit
                                      Existing Permit Number:
     Pesticide Applicator Certificate
       Name:
       Number:
       Class:
       Expiry date:
     Treatment Details:
      Property     Total               Pest*       Pesticide     PCP ** No.   Rate of




                                                      46
Updated 2010                       Pesticides Control Act                            Cap. P-4   47
                                        Regulations




* A Pesticide Application Permit will only be issued for the control of a noxious weed, as
designated under the Weed Control Act.
** Pest Control Product Registration Number


Requirements:
A map (1:10 ,000 scale) must be attached and identify:
(a) all property lines, fields, and treatment areas; and
(b) all open bodies of water, as defined under the Prince Edward Island Pesticides
Control Act; saltwater environments and perimeter coastline.
By signing below, I acknowledge that all information that I have provided is, to my
knowledge, true and accurate, and that I understand the above listed criteria for approval of
a Pesticide Application Permit.

Applicant Signature: ________________________                  Date: __________________

 iThe application fee for a Pesticide Application Permit is $50 per permit.
 iA separate application is required for each Pesticide Application Permit.

Method of Payment                       Please forward application and payment to:
(Check appropriate box)                 Department of Environment, Energy and Forestry
o Cheque                                Pollution Prevention Division
o Money Order                           Pesticide Regulatory Program
o Cash or Debit Card                    PO Box 2000, 11 Kent Street
o Credit Card                           Charlottetown, PE C1A 7N8
Amount Enclosed: $_______               Tel: (902) 368-5474

Cheques and money orders should be made payable to the Minister of Finance and
Municipal Affairs. Pesticide Application Permit will be mailed to the applicant’s
address above. Please allow two weeks for delivery.
(EC189/10)




                                             47
48    Cap. P-4                           Pesticides Control Act                       Updated 2010
                                              Regulations


                                              FORM 14

        APPLICATION FOR DOMESTIC PESTICIDE VENDOR BUSINESS LICENCE

      Under subsection 28.1 of the Pesticide Control Act Regulations, a person who operates a
      business involving the sale or supply of a controlled purchase domestic pesticide must hold
      a Domestic Pesticide Vendor Business Licence or a Non-Domestic Pesticide Vendor
      Business Licence.

      Personal information on this form is collected under section 13.1 of the Pesticide Control
      Act Regulations as it relates directly to and is necessary for an application for a Domestic
      Pesticide Vendor Business Licence. If you have any questions about this collection of
      personal information, you may contact the Manager of the Pesticide Regulatory Program,
      11 Kent Street, Jones Building, Charlottetown, PEI C1A 7N8, Phone: (902) 368-5474.

     Applicant Contact Information
     Company Name:
     Contact Name:
     Phone:                                         Fax:
     Mailing Address:

     Postal Code:                                    Email:

      Applicant’s Signature: ________________________ Date: _______________________
      (Where applicant is a partnership or a corporation, the signature of a partner, or an
      authorized officer of the corporation is required).

     Licence Details

     □ New Applicant             □oRenewal of Licence
                                   Present Licence Number:

     Certified Vendor Information (Domestic Pesticide Vendor Certificate Holder)
     Name:
     Phone:                                    Fax:
     Mailing Address:

     Postal Code:                              Email:
     Certified Vendor Status: o□ Owner of Company o□ Employee of Company
     Certificate Expiry Date:
     Pesticide Vendor Certificate # _____________________

      Signature of Certified Vendor: ______________________ Date:_____________________
                                     (if not company owner)

        Display Area and Storage Facility (check box to indicate size)
        □ surface area       □ surface area                           □ surface area
          up to 5 m2          between 5 m2 and 14 m2                     greater than 14 m2

        Previous Years Display and Storage Facility Size
        Please indicate the actual area (m2 ) used to display or store controlled purchase domestic
        pesticides in the previous licence year:



                                                    48
Updated 2010                     Pesticides Control Act                        Cap. P-4     49
                                      Regulations



           ______________________ year             _____________________ m2


The application fee for a Domestic Pesticide Vendor Business Licence is as follows:
(a) where the maximum surface area for the calendar
year of any shelf, or indoor or outdoor floor space used
to display or store controlled purchase domestic pesticides
is up to 5 m2                                                                        $100
(b) where the maximum surface area for the calendar
year of any shelf, or indoor or outdoor floor space used
to display or store controlled purchase domestic pesticides
is between 5 m2 and 14 m2                                                            $250
(c) where the maximum surface area for the calendar
year of any shelf, or indoor or outdoor floor space used
to display or store controlled purchase domestic pesticides
is greater than 14 m2                                                               $500
The size of display areas and storage facilities for the previous calendar year must be
included with the application.

Method of Payment           Please forward application and payment to:
(Check appropriate box)     Department of Environment, Energy and Forestry
  Cheque                    Pollution Prevention Division
  Money Order               Pesticide Regulatory Program
  Cash or Debit Card        PO Box 2000, 11 Kent Street
  Credit Card               Charlottetown, PE C1A 7N8
Amount Enclosed: $_________ Tel: (902) 368-5474

Cheques or money orders should be made payable to the Minister of Finance and
Municipal Affairs. Domestic Pesticide Vendor Licences will be mailed to the
applicant’s address above. Please allow two weeks for delivery.
(EC71/07; 189/10)




                                          49
50    Cap. P-4                           Pesticides Control Act                       Updated 2010
                                              Regulations


                                              FORM 15

            APPLICATION FOR DOMESTIC PESTICIDE VENDOR CERTIFICATE

      Under section 30.1 of the Pesticide Control Act Regulations, a person who sells controlled
      purchase domestic pesticides to another person or while acting as an employee of a business
      that is licensed to sell controlled purchase domestic pesticides and who provides
      information or recommendations regarding a controlled purchase domestic pesticide to
      another person, must hold a Domestic Pesticide Vendor Certificate or a Non-domestic
      Pesticide Vendor Certificate.

      Personal information on this form is collected under section 14.1 of the Pesticide Control
      Act Regulations as it relates directly to and is necessary for an application for a Domestic
      Pesticide Vendor Certificate. If you have any questions about this collection of personal
      information, you may contact the Manager of the Pesticide Regulatory Program, 11 Kent
      Street, Jones Building, Charlottetown, PEI C1A 7N8, Phone: (902) 368-5474.

     Applicant Contact Information
     Name:
     Phone:                                         Fax:
     Mailing Address:

     Postal Code:                                    Email:

      Applicant’s Signature: ________________________           Date: _______________________

     Office Use Only
     Examination Date:
     Examination Mark:
     Certificate Status:
                                     □ Approved o          □ Denied o

      iThe application fee for a Domestic Pesticide Vendor Certificate is $75 per certificate
      iPrior to a certificate being issued, the applicant must successfully complete a written
       examination approved by the Director, with a mark in the examination of not less than
       75%.

      Method of Payment           Please forward application and payment to:
      (Check appropriate box)     Department of Environment, Energy and Forestry
        Cheque                    Pollution Prevention Division
        Money Order               Pesticide Regulatory Program
        Cash or Debit Card        PO Box 2000, 11 Kent Street
        Credit Card               Charlottetown, PE C1A 7N8
      Amount Enclosed: $_________ Tel: (902) 368-5474

      Cheques or money orders should be made payable to the Minister of Finance and
      Municipal Affairs. Domestic Pesticide Vendor Certificates will be mailed to
      applicant’s address above. Please allow two weeks for delivery.
      (EC71/07; 189/10)




                                                    50
Updated 2010                                         Pesticides Control Act                                                      Cap. P-4        51
                                                          Regulations


                                                              FORM 16

                     DOMESTIC PESTICIDE VENDOR BUSINESS LICENCE


                                         Province of Prince Edward Island
                                  Department of Environment, Energy and Forestry

                                    Domestic Pesticide Vendor Business Licence


                                                     This certifies that
                                          a licence was issued by the Minister to

                                                           (Company Name)

                                      to operate a business involving the sale
                               or supply of a controlled purchase domestic pesticide
                                     in the Province of Prince Edward Island
                                          pursuant to section 13.1 of the
                                        Pesticides Control Act Regulations.

Licence Number: .......................................................................................................................
Issue Date: .................................................................................................................................
Expiry Date: ..............................................................................................................................
Minister: ....................................................................................................................................

(EC71/07)




                                                                     51
52   Cap. P-4                                               Pesticides Control Act                             Updated 2010
                                                                 Regulations


                                                                      FORM 17

                                 DOMESTIC PESTICIDE VENDOR CERTIFICATE


                                     DOMESTIC PESTICIDE VENDOR CERTIFICATE



     Name: ......................................................................................
     Address: ...................................................................................
     ..................................................................................................   Photo here
     Phone: ......................................................................................
     Certificate Number: .................................................................
     Expiry Date: ............................................................................
     Minister: ..................................................................................


     (EC71/07)




                                                                            52
Updated 2010                       Pesticides Control Act                           Cap. P-4     53
                                        Regulations


                                     SCHEDULE 4
                                  APPLICATION FEES

1 LICENCES
Non-domestic Pesticide Vendor Business Licence
(a) where up to 10,000 kg of active ingredients
sold in the previous year                                                               $100
(b) where between 10,001 kg and 30,000 kg of
active ingredients sold in the previous year                                            $500
(c) where between 30,001 kg and 50,000 kg of
active ingredients sold in the previous year                                          $1,000
(d) where over 50,000 kg of active ingredients
sold in the previous year                                                             $2,500

Pesticide Applicator Business
Licence                                                             $200 per class of licence

Domestic Pesticide Vendor Business License
(a) where the maximum surface area for the calendar
year of any shelf, or indoor or outdoor floor space used
to display or store controlled purchase domestic
pesticides is up to 5 m2 *                                                               $100
(b) where the maximum surface area for the calendar
year of any shelf, or indoor or outdoor floor space used
to display or store controlled purchase domestic pesticides
is between 5 m2 and 14 m2 **                                                             $250
(c) where the maximum surface area for the calendar
year of any shelf, or indoor or outdoor floor space used
to display or store controlled purchase domestic pesticides
 is greater than 14 m2                                                                   $500

2 CERTIFICATES
Non-Domestic Pesticide Vendor Certificate                                                 $75
***Pesticide Applicator Certificate                               $75 per class of certificate
Loader/Mixer Certificate                                                                  $50
Domestic Pesticide Vendor Certificate                                                     $75

3 PERMITS
Pesticide Application Permit                                                              $50
Pesticide Purchase Permit                                                                 $50


NOTES:
* 5m2 = 54 sq feet
** 14m2 = 151 sq feet

*** The fee for a Class D, Class G and Class I Pesticide Applicator Certificate may be
waived if the applicant holds a valid Class A Pesticide Applicator Certificate, a valid AG-1
Pesticide Use Certificate or a valid Loader/mixer Certificate.
(EC761/05; 71/07; 290/08)




                                             53
54   Cap. P-4                              Pesticides Control Act                      Updated 2010
                                                Regulations


                                      SCHEDULE 5
                       PHASE-IN OF CONTINUING EDUCATION CREDITS

     Expiry Date                                 Number of CECs Required
     of Existing                                    for Recertification
      Pesticide
         Use
      Certificate
                    By the expiry     Within      Within 24   Within 36    Within 48      Within 60
                     date of the    12 months*    months*     months*      months*        months*
                        PUC
       May 01,                       3**            6             9            12           15
        2002 to
      December
       31, 2002
     January 01,                                    6             9            12           15
        2003 to
      December
       31, 2003
     January 01,                      6             9             12           15
        2004 to
      December
       31, 2004
     January 01,        6             9            12             15
        2005 to
      December
       31, 2005
     January 01,        9             12           15
        2006 to
      December
       31, 2006
     January 01,        12            15
        2007 to
      December
       31, 2007
     January 01,        15
        2008 to
      December
       31, 2008
     January 01,        15
        2009 to
      December
       31, 2009
     January 01,        15
        2010 to
      December
       31, 2010
     January 01,        15
        2011 to
      December
       31, 2011
      * Of the expiry date noted on the candidate’s pesticide use certificate.
      ** For an individual whose Pesticide Applicator Certificate expired during the period
      January 1 to December 31, 2002, the 3 credits required must be earned not later than 01
      May 2004. (EC761/05)



                                                     54
 Updated 2010                     Pesticides Control Act                Cap. P-4   55
                                       Regulations



                                   SCHEDULE 6
                              PROHIBITED PESTICIDES

1. Telone II Liquid Soil Fumigant                          PCP Act No. 15893
2. Telone C-17 Liquid Soil Fungicide and Nematicide        PCP Act No. 16324
3. Vorlex Plus Liquid Soil Fumigant                        PCP Act No. 18353
4. Vorlex Plus CP Liquid Soil Fumigant                     PCP Act No. 18354
  (EC761/05)




                                           55
56   Cap. P-4                           Pesticides Control Act                         Updated 2010
                                             Regulations


                                          SCHEDULE 7
                                        EXEMPTED PESTICIDES

     The pesticides listed below are designated as exempted pesticides.

     Insecticides

     1.         Bacillus thuringiensis kurstaki (Btk) for control of caterpillars;
     2.         boron compounds for control of ants;
     3.         d-phenothrin for control of flying insects;
     4.         d-trans-allethrin, also referred to as d-cis, trans allethrin for
                control of mosquitoes;
     5.         fatty acids for control of insects
     6.         insect bait stations for control of crawling insects;
     7.         insect pheromones for control of insects;
     8.         insect repellents to repel biting insects (mosquitoes and black
                flies);
     9.         mineral oils for insect and mite control;
     10.        n-octyl bicycloheptene dicarboximide for control of crawling
                insects;
     11.        naphthalene for fabric protection, also known as moth balls;
     12.        paradichlorobenzene for fabric protection, also known as moth
                balls;
     13.        permethrin;
     14.        pesticides in aerosol containers;
     15.        pesticides registered under the Pest Control Products
                Act (Canada) for application to pets to control insects such as
                fleas;
     16.        piperonyl butoxide to control flying insects;
     17.        pyrethrins to control insects;
     18.        resmethrin to control flying insects;
     19.        silica aerogel, also referred to as silica gel, amorphous silica and
                amorphous silica gel to control ants, earwigs, and other crawling
                insects;
     20.        silicon dioxide, also referred to as “diatomaceous earth” to
                control crawling insects;
     21.        insecticidal soaps;
     22.        tetramethrin to control house and garden insects;
     23.        pesticides for injection to tree stems or stumps;
     24.        sticky media;

     Herbicides
     25.        acetic acid for nonselective control of weeds;
     26.        corn gluten meal;
     27.        herbicidal soaps;
     27.1       iron;

     Animal Repellents
     28.      animal repellents, except thiram – to keep dogs and cats out of
              areas, such as flower beds;
     29.      capsaicin;

     Preservatives
     30.        anti-fouling paints, to reduce attachment of barnacles and other
                marine organisms to boats and wharves;



                                                   56
Updated 2010                      Pesticides Control Act                    Cap. P-4   57
                                       Regulations


31.       antisapstain wood preservatives for control of diseases in wood
32.       asphalt solids (pruning paints);

Chemicals
33.       ferric phosphate to control slugs and snails;
34.       sulphur, including lime sulphur, sulphide sulphur, and calcium
          polysulphide to control diseases on ornamental trees.
(EC71/07; 417/10)




                                           57
58   Cap. P-4                           Pesticides Control Act                        Updated 2010
                                             Regulations


                                        SCHEDULE 8
                               SELF-SELECT DOMESTIC PESTICIDES

     The pesticides listed below are designated as self-select domestic pesticides.

        (1) The domestic pesticide is marketed in a form requiring no preparation or dilution and
     in a volume or weight equal to or less than one litre or one kilogram, respectively, and it is
     intended for one or more of the following uses exclusively:
           (a) as a fabric protection, if the product is composed of paradichlorobenzene or
           naphthalene;
           (b) as ant, cockroach or earwig bait, if the container protects users against direct
           contact with the product;
           (c) as an animal repellent, if the product is not polymerized butene-based or thiram-
           based;
           (d) as flea-repellent collars or tags for dogs and cats;
           (e) as insect repellent to be applied on human beings;
           (f) as a pesticide for local treatment that does not contain any of the following active
           ingredients:
               (i) carbaryl,
               (ii) dicofol,
               (iii) malathion,
               (iv) 2,4-D (all chemical forms),
               (v) chlorthal dimethyl,
               (vi) MCPA (all chemical forms),
               (vii) mecoprop (all chemical forms),
               (viii) benomyl,
               (ix) captan,
               (x) chlorothalonil,
               (xi) iprodione,
               (xii) quintozene,
               (xiii) thiophanate-methyl.

        (2) The domestic pesticide is marketed in a form requiring no preparation or dilution and
     in a volume or weight equal to or less than one litre or one kilogram, respectively, and it is
     composed of a mixture that contains one or more of the following active ingredients
     exclusively:
           (a) D-Trans allethrin;
           (b) tetramethrin;
           (c) resmethrin;
           (d) pyrethrin;
           (e) piperonyl butoxide;
           (f) methopren;
           (g) n-octyl bicycloheptene dicarboximide;
           (h) di-n-propyl isocinchomeronate;
           (i) n-octyl hydroxyethyl-2 sulphide;
           (j) D-cis, trans allethrin;
           (k) permethrin;
           (l) D-phenothrin;
           (m) boric acid;
           (n) disodium octaborate tetrahydrate;
           (o) sulphur;
           (p) calcium sulphide or calcium polysulphide;
           (q) ferric phosphate;
           (r) spinosad;
           (s) acetamipride;
           (t) borax.


                                                  58
Updated 2010                       Pesticides Control Act                     Cap. P-4   59
                                        Regulations


   (3) The domestic pesticide is composed of a mixture containing one or more of the
following active ingredients exclusively:
      (a) bacillus thuringiensis Berliner var Kurstaki;
      (b) diatomaceous earth;
      (c) soap.

  (4) The domestic pesticide is a mixture that
     (a) requires no preparation or dilution; and
     (b) contains soap or diatomaceous earth as the only active ingredient.
(EC71/07)




                                             59
