                         PLEASE NOTE
This document, prepared by the Legislative Counsel Office, is an office
consolidation of this Act, current to April 10, 2010. It is intended for
information and reference purposes only.

This document is not the official version of the Act. The Act and the
amendments as printed under the authority of the Queen’s Printer for the
province should be consulted to determine the authoritative statement of the
law.

For more information concerning the history of this Act, please see the
Table of Public Acts.

If you find any errors or omissions in this consolidation, please contact:

                         Legislative Counsel Office
                            Tel: (902) 368-4291
                        Email: legislation@gov.pe.ca
                          CHAPTER P-4

                      PESTICIDES CONTROL ACT


1. In this Act                                                               Definitions

    (a) “animal”                                                             animal
       (i) means any animal other than man,
       (ii) includes mammals, birds, fish, amphibians, reptiles,
       invertebrates, insects and animals similar to insects, wild or
       domestic, living or dead;
    (a.1) “application” in relation to a pesticide, means any release into   application
    the environment;
       (i) that is in accordance with information on the pesticide product
       label, and
       (ii) that is in accordance with the Pest Control Products Act
       (Canada) regulations;
    (b) repealed by 2005,c.15,s.1;                                           Committee

    (c) “Department” means the Department of Environment, Energy             Department
    and Forestry;
    (d) “Director” means such employee of the Department as may be so        Director
    designated by the Minister;
    (d.1) “discharge” includes any drainage, deposit, release, spill, leak   discharge
    or emission of a pesticide into the environment but does not include
    application;
    (e) “inspector” means an inspector appointed by the Minister for the     inspector
    purposes of this Act and the regulations;
    (e.1) “license” means a license authorizing a person to sell or apply    license
    a pesticide;
    (e.2) “meadow” means a wetland that has fluctuating water tables,        meadow
    lacks trees, and is covered in water-tolerant Graminoid vegetation;
    (f) “Minister” means the Minister designated by the Lieutenant           Minister
    Governor in Council to administer this Act;
    (g) “natural environment” means all or any part or combination of        natural environment
    the air, land and water of Prince Edward Island;
    (h) “open body of water” means a watercourse or wetland that             open body of water
    contains water at the time a pesticide is applied;
    (i) “pesticide”                                                          pesticide



                                     1
2                       Cap. P-4                       Pesticides Control Act



                                   (i) means any product, device, organism, substance or thing
                                   intended, sold or represented for use in destroying or repelling
                                   any insect, nematode, rodent, predatory animal, bacterium,
                                   fungus, weed or other form of plant or animal life or virus, except
                                   bacteria or fungi living in man or animals, and
                                   (ii) includes any product, device, organism, substance or thing
                                   required to be registered under the Pest Control Products Act
                                   R.S.C. 1985, Chap. P-9;
pesticide certificate        (i.1) “pesticide certificate” means a document issued to a certified
                             applicator, certified assistant or certified salesperson as defined in
                             the regulations;
plant                        (j) “plant” means any vegetative plant grown for agricultural,
                             forestry, aesthetic or aquatic purposes;
Prince Edward                (j.1) “Prince Edward Island Wetland Inventory” means the
Island Wetland               geographic information system database of wetlands on Prince
Inventory
                             Edward Island maintained by the Department;
seasonally flooded           (j.2) “seasonally flooded flats” means a wetland formed by rivers
flats                        overflowing their banks to a depth of at least 12 inches annually
                             during spring, winter and late fall;
sediment bed                 (j.3) “sediment bed” means a depression or low area of mud, silt,
                             sand, gravel, rock or bedrock, or a combination thereof, which has a
                             defined path which was formed or apparently formed by flowing
                             water;
sell                         (k) “sell” includes keep for sale, expose for sale, offer for sale and
                             advertise.
shrub swamp                  (k.1) “shrub swamp” means a wetland containing nutrient-rich,
                             highly decomposed woody plant and organic material and has as its
                             dominant cover shrubs and herbaceous vegetation, including but not
                             limited to alders;
watercourse                  (l) “watercourse” means an area which has a sediment bed and may
                             or may not contain water, and without limiting the generality of the
                             foregoing, includes the full length and width of the sediment bed,
                             bank and shore of any stream, spring, creek, brook, river, lake, pond,
                             bay, estuary or coastal body, any water therein, and any part thereof,
                             up to and including the watercourse boundary;
watercourse                  (m) “watercourse boundary” means
boundary                       (i) in a non-tidal watercourse, the edge of the sediment bed, and
                               (ii) in a tidal watercourse, the top of the bank of the watercourse,
                               and where there is no discernible bank, means the mean high
                               water mark of the watercourse;


                                                                 2
                             Pesticides Control Act                  Cap. P-4                         3



    (n) “wetland” means                                                         wetland
       (i) an area which contains hydric soil, aquatic or water-tolerant
       vegetation, and may or may not contain water, and includes any
       water therein and everything up to and including the wetland
       boundary, and
       (ii) without limiting the generality of the foregoing, includes any
       area identified in the Prince Edward Island Wetland Inventory as
       open water, deep marsh, shallow marsh, salt marsh, seasonally
       flooded flats, brackish marsh, a shrub swamp, a wooded swamp, a
       bog or a meadow;
    (o) “wetland boundary” means where the vegetation in a wetland              wetland boundary
    changes from aquatic or water-tolerant vegetation to terrestrial
    vegetation or water-intolerant vegetation;
    (p) “wooded swamp” means a wetland dominated by water-tolerant              wooded swamp
    trees or shrubs growing in a muck soil and covered by a moss layer
    at least 30 centimetres thick.1984,c.29,s.1; 1988,c.49,s.1;
    1993,c.29,s.4; 1997,c.20,s.3; 2001, (2nd),c.46,s.1; 2002,c.18,s.1;
    2004,c.36,s.3; 2005,c.15,s.1; 2008,c.55,s.1.
2. (1) No person shall sell or otherwise supply to any person a pesticide       Sale of pesticides
that does not meet the standards prescribed by the regulations in respect
of
     (a) registration;
     (b) packaging and labelling; or
     (c) efficacy in relation to the purpose for which it was manufactured
     or made.
  (2) Subject to subsection (3), no person shall                                Prohibitions re:
    (a) sell, distribute, use, apply, handle, store or transport a pesticide;   sale, distribution,
                                                                                use
    (b) operate or clean any machinery, equipment or vehicle used in
    connection with the sale, distribution, use, application, handling,
    storage or transportation of a pesticide; or
    (c) use or clean a pesticide container,
except in accordance with the regulations with respect to that pesticide
and the label for that pesticide.
  (3) If there is a conflict between any applicable provision of the            Conflict
regulations and the provision on the label referred to in subsection (2),
the most stringent provision prevails.
  (4) No person shall dispose of a pesticide, a mixture containing a            Disposal
pesticide, a thing that is treated or contaminated with a pesticide or a
container that has been used to hold a pesticide in a manner other than
the manner prescribed in the regulations. 1984,c.29,s.2; 2009,c.13,s.2.



                                       3
4                    Cap. P-4                     Pesticides Control Act



Lawn, defined        2.1 (1) In this section, “lawn” means a plot of grass that is maintained at
                     a regular and approximately uniform height through periodic and regular
                     mowing, other than as a result of agricultural activities.
Application            (2) For the purposes of subsection (1), the production of sod as an
                     agricultural product is considered an agricultural activity.
Prohibition            (3) No person shall use pesticide products that contain any form of the
                     chemical 2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic Acid for the control of lawn pests,
                     except where the chemical is used for pest control on commercial golf
                     courses. 2009,c.13,s.3.
Illegal use of       3. (1) No person, whether or not acting under the authority of a license,
pesticides           pesticide certificate or permit under this Act or any exemption under the
                     regulations, shall apply, discharge, or cause or allow the application or
                     discharge of a pesticide or of any substance or thing containing a
                     pesticide into the natural environment that
                          (a) causes or is likely to cause impairment of the quality of the
                          natural environment greater than the impairment, if any, that would
                          necessarily result from the proper use of the pesticide;
                          (b) causes or is likely to cause injury or damage to property or to
                          plant or animal life greater than the injury or damage, if any, that
                          would necessarily result from the proper use of the pesticide;
                          (c) causes or is likely to cause harm or discomfort to any person
                          greater than the harm or discomfort, if any, that would necessarily
                          result from the proper use of the pesticide; or
                          (d) impairs or is likely to impair the safety of any person to a greater
                          degree than the impairment, if any, of the safety of any person that
                          would necessarily result from the proper use of the pesticide.
Evidence of            (2) A statement in or upon a pesticide container in which a pesticide is
recommended use      or was contained, purporting to be a recommendation as to the use of the
                     pesticide contained therein, is admissible in evidence in a prosecution for
                     a violation of subsection (1) and, in the absence of proof to the contrary,
                     shall be held to be the manufacturer's written recommendation as to the
                     use of the pesticide. 1984,c.29,s.3; 2001,(2nd),c.46,s.2.
Keeping, storage     4. (1) Every person who keeps, stores or transports a pesticide shall do so
and transportation   in a manner that
of pesticides
                          (a) ensures that the pesticide does not come into contact with or
                          contaminate food or drink of humans, animals or plants; and
                          (b) prevents the pesticide from coming, directly or indirectly, into
                          contact with human, animal or plant life in any other manner that
                          may be injurious to that life.




                                                            4
                            Pesticides Control Act                  Cap. P-4                         5



  (2) Where a pesticide is sold or otherwise supplied in bulk and is not       Sale of pesticides in
contained in packages, any information or warning respecting its               bulk

handling or use that would have been required to be stated on the label
had the pesticide been in packaged form, shall be supplied in writing at
the time of delivery by the vendor or other supplier to the person to
whom the pesticide is delivered. 1984,c.29,s.4.
5. (1) No person shall have in his possession or keep a pesticide in a         Pesticide,
container other than                                                           containers and
                                                                               storage
     (a) the container in which the pesticide was originally stored for sale
     or offered for sale after manufacture; or
     (b) a container that is of a type customarily used or approved for that
     purpose by the manufacturer and that bears a label meeting any
     requirements prescribed by this Act or the regulations.
  (2) Subsection (1) does not apply to the storing or keeping of               Application of
pesticides in tanks or machines that are used for the mixing, holding or       subsection (1)

applying of pesticides. 1984, c.29, s.5.
6. No person shall                                                             Disposal of
    (a) dispose of any pesticide or mixture containing a pesticide; or         pesticides

    (b) bury, decontaminate, burn or otherwise dispose of any container
    that has been used to hold a pesticide,
except at a site or in a manner, as the case may be, that is
    (c) prescribed by the regulations; or
    (d) recommended by the manufacturer of the pesticide or the
    Minister. 1984, c.29, s.6.
7. No person shall apply or cause or allow the application of a pesticide      Pesticides in water
or any substance containing a pesticide into, upon or over an open body
of water unless the person holds a permit in accordance with the
regulations authorizing that person to so act. 1984,c.29,s.7;
2001,(2nd),c.46,s.3.
8. No person shall                                                             Licensing of
    (a) operate a business or provide a service involving the sale, use or     pesticide services
                                                                               and vendors
    application of a pesticide; or
    (b) for hire or reward apply or offer to apply or sell a pesticide,
unless he is licensed to do so pursuant to the regulations under this Act.
1984,c.29,s.8.
9. Repealed by 2005,c.15,s.2. 1984, c.29, s.9; 2005,c.15,s.2.                  Pesticides Advisory
                                                                               Committee
10. Repealed by 2005,c.15,s.2. 1984, c.29, s.10; 2005,c.15,s.2.                Meetings

11. (1) The Minister may issue, refuse, renew, suspend, cancel or              Licenses, etc.
reinstate any license, permit or pesticide certificate.


                                      5
6                     Cap. P-4                    Pesticides Control Act



Delegation            (2) The Minister may delegate to the Director his powers under
                      subsection (1). 1984,c.29,s.11; 1991,c.28,s.1; 2001,c.46,s.4.
Orders                12. Where the Minister determines that any crop, food, feed, animal,
                      plant, water, produce, product or other matter is contaminated by a
                      pesticide, he may by order
                           (a) prohibit or restrict the sale, handling, use or distribution of the
                           crop, food, feed, animal, plant, water, produce, product or other
                           matter permanently or for such length of time as he considers
                           necessary; or
                           (b) cause the crop, food, feed, animal, plant, water, produce, product
                           or other matter to be destroyed or rendered harmless,
                      and no person shall be entitled to compensation therefor. 1984,c.29,s.12.
Restrict, prohibit    12.1 (1) The Minister may restrict or prohibit the sale, supply or use of
sale, supply or use   any pesticide group and may impose such conditions with respect to the
                      sale, supply or use of any pesticide group, as the Minister considers
                      necessary.
Idem                    (2) Where the Minister has restricted or prohibited the sale, supply or
                      use of any pesticide group under subsection (1), the Minister shall
                      publish a notice thereof in the Royal Gazette.
Idem                    (3) No person shall be convicted of an offence consisting of a
                      contravention of section 12.2 committed before a notice is published in
                      the Royal Gazette pursuant to subsection (2), unless it is proved that at
                      the date of the alleged contravention reasonable steps had been taken to
                      bring the purport of the restriction or prohibition to the notice of those
                      persons likely to be affected by it. 2009,c.13,s.4.
Prohibition           12.2 Where the Minister has restricted or prohibited the sale, supply or
                      use of any pesticide group under section 12.1, no person shall
                           (a) sell or supply that pesticide group or sell or supply a pesticide
                           contained in that pesticide group; or
                           (b) use that pesticide group or use a pesticide contained in that
                           pesticide group,
                      except in accordance with such conditions as are specified in the terms of
                      a restriction. 2009,c.13,s.4.
Inspectors            13. (1) The Minister may appoint one or more employees of the
                      Department as inspectors for the purpose of administering this Act and
                      the regulations.
Idem                    (2) A conservation officer appointed under the Wildlife Conservation
                      Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap. W-4.1 is an inspector by virtue of his or her
                      office. 1984,c.29,s.13; 2006,c.16,s.63(9.2).



                                                            6
                             Pesticides Control Act                   Cap. P-4                        7



14. (1) Where an inspector, having reasonable and probable grounds,              Order suspending
believes that the use, handling, storage, sale, disposal or display, or the      dangerous user, etc.

method of application or transportation, of a pesticide is or may be
dangerous to the health of persons or of any animal or contrary to the
specifications in the relevant certificate of registration under the Pest
Control Products Act (Canada), he may in writing order the suspension
of that use, handling, storage, sale, disposal or display, or method of
application or transportation, of the pesticide for a period not exceeding
seven days from the issuance of the order.
 (2) Each order under subsection (1) shall indicate the reason for               Reason to be
making it and the inspector shall send a copy of the order to the Director.      indicated


  (3) The Director shall forthwith review an order made by an inspector          Review by Director
under subsection (1) and may vary or revoke the order. 1984,c.29,s.14.
15. (1) Where, having reasonable and probable grounds, the Director              Chemical control
believes that the use, handling, storage, sale, disposal or display of, or the   order

method of application or of transportation of, a pesticide or of a
substance or thing containing a pesticide
     (a) causes or is likely to cause injury or damage to or impairment of
     the quality of the natural environment;
     (b) causes or is likely to cause injury or damage to property or to
     plant or animal life;
     (c) adversely affects or is likely to adversely affect the health or
     safety of any person; or
     (d) renders or is likely to render, directly or indirectly, any property
     or plant or animal life unfit for use by man,
the Director may make an order called a “chemical control order”
directed to the person responsible for the pesticide or the substance or
thing containing a pesticide, and shall cause a copy of the order to be
served on the person to whom the order is directed.
  (2) The Director, in a chemical control order, may order the person            Directions
responsible for the pesticide or the substance or thing containing the           contained in order

pesticide to do any or all of the following:
     (a) limit or control the rate of application or discharge of a pesticide
     or a substance or thing containing a pesticide into the natural
     environment in accordance with the directions set out in the order;
     (b) stop the application or discharge of a pesticide or a substance or
     thing containing a pesticide into the natural environment,
        (i) permanently,
        (ii) for a specified period of time, or
        (iii) in the circumstances set out in the order;
     (c) comply with any directions set out in the order relating to the
     manner in which a pesticide or a substance or thing containing a


                                       7
8                    Cap. P-4                     Pesticides Control Act



                          pesticide or any container of either of them may be handled, stored,
                          used, disposed of, transported, displayed or manufactured.
Variation of order   (3) The Director, under any of the circumstances set out in subsection
                     (1), may by a further order amend, vary or rescind a chemical control
                     order and in that case shall cause a copy of the amending, varying or
                     rescinding order to be served on the person to whom the chemical
                     control order was directed. 1984,c.29,s.15; 2001,c.46,s.5.
Notice               16. Where the Minister, acting under section 11 or 12, does an act, to the
                     direct adverse interest of any person, the Minister shall in writing at the
                     time notify that person, giving reasons therefor. 1984,c.29,s.16.
Enforcement of       17. (1) Where the person to whom an order is directed under section 14
orders               or 15 fails to comply with the order, the Director may take whatever
                     action he considers necessary to effect compliance with the order and
                     may charge the cost of that action to the person to whom that order is
                     directed.
Recovery of costs      (2) The cost incurred under subsection (1) in effecting compliance with
                     an order
                         (a) shall be paid on demand by the person to whom the order was
                         directed; and
                         (b) is recoverable by the Minister as a debt due to the Crown. 1984,
                         c.29, s.17.
Appeal               18. Repealed by 2005,c.15,s.2. 1984, c.29, s.18; 2005,c.15,s.2.
Powers to inspect    19. (1) For the purposes of carrying out this Act and the regulations an
and take samples     inspector may
                          (a) at any reasonable time enter upon and inspect any land, premises,
                          vehicle, equipment, record, document or other property;
                          (b) inspect and take samples of or extracts from anything referred to
                          in clause (a) or of any soil, water, food, feed, crop, animal, pesticide
                          or other substance; and
                          (c) subject anything referred to in clause (b) to laboratory analysis or
                          other examination for the purpose of determining whether or not the
                          article or substance in question is or has been contaminated by a
                          pesticide.
Premises               (2) In subsection (1) “premises” does not include a private dwelling
                     house.
Certificate of         (3) The Minister shall furnish an inspector with a certificate of his
appointment          appointment and the inspector shall, if requested to do so, produce the
                     certificate to any person owning or in charge of anything affected by the
                     inspector's activities under this Act or the regulations. 1984, c.29, s.19.


                                                            8
                            Pesticides Control Act                 Cap. P-4                       9



20. (1) Where it appears to a provincial court judge, on information laid
                                                                              Authority from
before him on oath, that there are reasonable and probable grounds for        judge to enter
believing that a private dwelling house within his territorial jurisdiction   private dwelling
contains
     (a) any crop, food, feed, animal, plant, water, produce, product or
     other matter that is contaminated by a pesticide; or
     (b) any record, document, vehicle, equipment or other thing that
     affords evidence of a contravention of this Act,
the judge may issue a warrant authorizing a peace officer, with or
without an inspector, to enter the private dwelling house, by force if
necessary, and search therefor.
  (2) Before entering a private dwelling house pursuant to this section, a    Attempt to locate
peace officer shall take reasonable steps to find the owner or person in      owner and seek
                                                                              cooperation
charge thereof and shall endeavour to obtain the cooperation of that
person.
  (3) Where a peace officer uses force in entering or searching a private     Use of force
dwelling house, he shall use no more force than is reasonably required
under the circumstances.
  (4) Where anything referred to in subsection (1) is found pursuant to       Disposition of
the execution of a warrant issued under this section, it may be dealt with    materials found

by an inspector in the same manner as a like item found at any other
place may be dealt with under this Act. 1984, c.29, s.20.
21. (1) The owner or person in charge of any land, premises, thing or         Assistance to
substance that an inspector is authorized to enter, inspect or take samples   inspector

of or extracts from shall give an inspector all reasonable assistance to
enable the inspector to carry out his functions under this Act and shall
furnish an inspector with such information as the inspector may
reasonably require.
  (2) No person shall obstruct or hinder an inspector in the carrying out     Obstruction
of his functions under this Act. 1984, c.29, s.21.
22. The Lieutenant Governor in Council may make regulations                   Regulations
    (a) prescribing the qualifications of applicants and the procedures
    for obtaining any class of license or pesticide certificate;
    (b) requiring persons licensed or holding a pesticide certificate or
    holding a permit to keep such records and to make such returns and
    in such manner as the regulations may prescribe;
    (c) prescribing the duration of any license or pesticide certificate or
    permit and fees for the issue, renewal or reinstatement of licenses or
    pesticide certificates or permits;
    (d) prescribing


                                      9
10   Cap. P-4                     Pesticides Control Act



              (i) classes of licenses and permits,
              (ii) the chemicals or other substances to which each class of
              license or permit relates,
              (iii) the nature and extent of the authority granted by each class of
              license or permit, and
              (iv) terms and conditions on any licenses, pesticide certificates or
              permits;
          (d.1) prescribing a system to be applied to certified applicators,
          certified assistants, and certified salespersons as defined in the
          regulations, setting out the terms and conditions under which the
          person who holds a pesticide certificate may apply, purchase or sell
          pesticides;
          (e) requiring applicants for licenses to apply pesticides to furnish a
          bond or carry insurance, of a type and in an amount that the
          regulations may specify, and providing that where a bond or policy
          of insurance expires or is cancelled, the license shall automatically
          be cancelled;
          (e.1) requiring applicants for a pesticide application permit to submit
          a risk impact assessment study, of a type that the regulations may
          specify, prior to the issue of a pesticide application permit;
          (f) requiring that any pesticide be registered in such manner and by
          such persons as the regulations may require, before being sold,
          supplied or used;
          (g) prescribing or restricting the manner in which a pesticide may be
          stored, transported, packaged, labelled, handled or sold or otherwise
          distributed;
          (h) prohibiting or restricting the sale or supply in bulk of a pesticide
          or of any substance treated by or mixed with a pesticide;
          (i) governing, regulating, restricting or prohibiting the use,
          application, distribution, packaging, handling, storage, display or
          disposal of
              (i) pesticide groups,
              (ii) fertilizer-pesticide blended products or other combination
              pesticide blended products,
              (iii) hose-end pesticides,
              (iv) pesticide concentrates and pesticides requiring preparation,
              (v) granular spreadable pesticides, or
              (vi) pesticides        containing      the       ingredient      2,4-
              Dichlorophenoxyacetic Acid;
          (i.1) prohibiting, regulating, restricting or controlling (including
          prescribing conditions for the prohibition, regulation, restriction or
          control) the sale, offering for sale, transfer or transportation of
              (i) pesticide groups,




                                           10
                        Pesticides Control Act                   Cap. P-4   11



    (ii) fertilizer-pesticide blended products or other combination
    pesticide blended products,
    (iii) hose-end pesticides,
    (iv) pesticide concentrates and pesticides requiring preparation,
    (v) granular spreadable pesticides, or
    (vi) pesticides        containing       the       ingredient     2,4-
    Dichlorophenoxyacetic Acid;
(i.2) respecting containers for pesticides, other than containers in
which pesticides are sold or offered for sale;
(i.3) governing signs, markings or other identification to be used
    (i) on vehicles, machinery and equipment used in pesticide
    application, in extermination or in the transportation of pesticides,
    and
    (ii) on facilities or places used to store pesticides;
(i.4) respecting the use, operation and cleaning of vehicles,
machinery, equipment and containers used in connection with the
use, application, distribution, packaging, storage, handling or
transportation of pesticides;
(i.5) prescribing categories of pesticide training events;
(i.6) prescribing classes of provincial certificates and establishing
standards for training and accreditation that must be successfully
completed for a person to meet the criteria prescribed for an
appropriate-class provincial certificate;
(i.7) prescribing the requirements for a pest management system and
establishing standards for accreditation that must be successfully
completed for a person to meet the criteria prescribed for an
Integrated Pest Management (IPM) accreditation;
(j) prohibiting or restricting the use of any machine or other
equipment in connection with the storage, use, application or
transportation of a pesticide;
(k) prescribing the conditions that must be met before a person may
be eligible to apply a pesticide in any open body of water;
(l) prohibiting or restricting the disposal or the manner in which a
pesticide or a package, container or other apparatus used in
connection with a pesticide may be disposed of;
(m) restricting the transport of a pesticide in or on any vehicle which
is located within twenty-five metres of the open body of water;
(n) requiring that containers for pesticides be labelled so as to clearly
specify the manner of use recommended by the manufacturers
thereof;
(o) prescribing forms and procedures to be used under this Act;
(p) restricting the application of pesticides
    (i) in a manner prescribed by the regulations, and
    (ii) within geographic zones set out in the regulations;



                                 11
12                    Cap. P-4                     Pesticides Control Act



                           (q) restricting the application of pesticides
                              (i) in a manner prescribed by the regulations, and
                              (ii) under climatic conditions set out in the regulations;
                           (r) exempting any pesticide, or group of pesticides, from the
                           operation of this Act, and prescribing the conditions for exemption;
                           (r.1) exempting any person or class of persons from this Act or the
                           regulations or any provision thereof and prescribing terms and
                           conditions attached to any such exemption;
                           (r.2) prescribing terms and conditions with respect to sales, offers to
                           sell, transfers or premises in, on or from which sales, offers to sell or
                           transfers of a pesticide are or will be made that shall attach to any
                           class of license;
                           (r.3) defining, for the purposes of this Act and the regulations, any
                           word or expression used in this Act or the regulations that has not
                           already been expressly defined in this Act;
                           (r.4) prescribing offences and imposing penalties for failure to
                           comply with any provision of the regulations;
                           (s) respecting any other matter considered necessary or advisable to
                           carry out effectively the intent and purpose of this Act.
                           1984,c.29,s.22; 1991,c.28,s.2; 2001,(2nd),c.46,s.6; 2005,c.15,s.3;
                           2008,c.55,s.2; 2009,c.13,s.5.
Adoption of federal   22.1 Regulations made under section 22 may adopt any or all of the
requirements          requirements prescribed by the Pest Control Products Act (Canada) and
                      the Fertilizers Act (Canada) and the regulations under those Acts as the
                      requirements for the purposes of this Act in respect of the labelling,
                      selling, handling, use, storage or transportation of pesticides.
                      2009,c.13,s.6.
Offences              23. Every person who fails to comply with or contravenes any provision
                      of this Act or the regulations is guilty of an offence and liable, on
                      summary conviction,
                          (a) to a fine of not less than $1,000 and not more than $50,000
                          where the person is a natural person;
                          (b) to a fine of not less than $5,000 and not more than $250,000
                          where the person is a corporation; and
                          (c) to pay such restitution as the judge considers appropriate to any
                          person aggrieved or affected by the failure or contravention.
                          1984,c.29,s.23;2001,(2nd),c.46,s.7; 2005,c.15,s.4.
Appointment of
analyst               24. (1) The Minister may appoint an analyst for the purposes of this Act
                      and may make payment to the analyst for his services and any expenses
                      incurred by him in the administration or enforcement of this Act.
Certificate of          (2) In any proceedings under this Act, a certificate of analysis of any
analyst as evidence   substance, purporting to be signed by an analyst appointed under


                                                            12
                           Pesticides Control Act                 Cap. P-4   13



subsection (1), shall be admitted in evidence as prima facie proof of the
facts stated therein without proof of the signature or appointment of the
person making the certificate. 1984, c.29, s.24.




                                    13
