                             PLEASE NOTE
This document, prepared by the Legislative Counsel Office, is an office
consolidation of this regulation, current to June 3, 2006. It is intended for
information and reference purposes only.

This document is not the official version of these regulations. The regulations and
the amendments printed in the Royal Gazette should be consulted to determine the
authoritative text of these regulations.

For more information concerning the history of these regulations, please see the
Table of Regulations.

If you find any errors or omissions in this consolidation, please contact:

                             Legislative Counsel Office
                                Tel: (902) 368-4291
                            Email: legislation@gov.pe.ca
                           CHAPTER T-4.1

                              TRAILS ACT

                      GENERAL REGULATIONS

Pursuant to section 14 of the Trails Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap. T-4.1,
Council made the following regulations:

1. In these regulations                                                          Definitions

    (a) “Act” means the Trails Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap. T-4.1;                  Act

    (a.1) “at large” means not under control and includes unleashed;             at large

    (b) “permit” means a permit issued by the trail manager under                permit
    subsection 2(4);
    (b.1) “power-assisted bicycle” means a power-assisted bicycle as             power-assisted
    defined in the Motor Vehicle Safety Act Regulations (Canada);                bicycle

    (c) “Prince Edward Island Snowmobile Association Inc.” means the             Prince Edward
    body corporate of that name incorporated under the Companies Act             Island Snowmobile
                                                                                 Association Inc.
    R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap. C-14;
    (d) “trail” means the trail designated by the Lieutenant Governor in         trail
    Council under subsection 4(1) of the Act;
    (e) “trail manager” means a trail manager appointed by the Minister          trail manager
    under subsection 5(2) of the Act. (EC760/03; 308/06)
2. (1) Within the right-of-way occupied by the trail, no person shall            Offences
     (a) cut, destroy or remove trees, hedgerows, shrubs or other
     vegetation;
     (b) plant or otherwise introduce plants on the trail;
     (c) add or remove topsoil, sand, gravel or any other organic or
     inorganic material;
     (d) construct or erect buildings, signs, fences, walls, dams, drainage
     systems or other structures of any kind;
     (e) remove, damage or deface gates, benches, shelters or other
     structures erected along the trail or at entrances or exits to the trail;
     (f) remove or damage the trail surface, trail bed, bridges or any other
     surface or sub-surface features or structures of the trail;
     (g) display any kind of advertisement, carry on any type of business
     or offer for sale any article or service;
     (h) hunt or place traps or snares;



                                      1
2                     Cap. T-4.1                       Trails Act                     Updated 2006
                                                   General Regulations


                          (i) except where otherwise authorized by law, transport any type of
                          unencased firearm that is loaded or unloaded;
                          (j) pollute or obstruct any stream or body of water;
                          (k) start, maintain or renew a fire, other than in grills or containers
                          provided or contrary to provincial fire laws;
                          (l) allow a dog or other animal to run at large; or
                          (m) operate any conveyance drawn by an animal,
                      unless the person holds a permit authorizing the person to do so.
Offence and penalty     (1.1) Every person who contravenes clause 2(1)(l) is guilty of an
                      offence and is liable, on summary conviction, to a fine of not less than
                      $100 and not more than $1,000.
Idem                    (2) No person shall ride a bicycle on the trail unless the person
                          (a) is wearing a bicycle safety helmet; and
                          (b) has the chin strap securely fastened.
Idem                    (3) No parent or guardian of a person under 16 years of age shall
                      authorize or knowingly permit that person to ride or operate a bicycle on
                      the trail unless the person
                           (a) is wearing a bicycle safety helmet; and
                           (b) has the chin strap securely fastened.
Offence and penalty     (3.1) Every person who contravenes subsections (2) or (3) is guilty of
                      an offence and is liable, on summary conviction, to a fine of not less than
                      $50 and not more than $100.
Exception               (4) Notwithstanding subsection (1), the trail manager may engage in
                      activities prohibited in subsection (1) or section 3 or issue a permit to
                      other persons to do so, where such activity is, in the opinion of the trail
                      manager,
                           (a) necessary for the proper management or maintenance of the trail;
                           or
                           (b) necessary to recognize specific needs or activities of adjacent
                           property owners, where such activities are not otherwise prohibited
                           by any other enactment. (EC760/03; 308/06)
Motorized vehicles    3. No person shall operate a motorized vehicle on the trail unless the
                      person
                          (a) is operating a snowmobile and is doing so in accordance with
                          and during the term of a lease agreement between the Government
                          of Prince Edward Island and the Prince Edward Island Snowmobile
                          Association Inc.;
                          (b) is operating a motorized wheelchair during the period beginning
                          April 1 in a year and ending November 30 in that year;




                                                           2
Updated 2006                    Trails Act                       Cap. T-4.1                    3
                            General Regulations


    (b.1) is operating a power-assisted bicycle during the period
    beginning April 1 in a year and ending November 30 in that year;
    (c) is operating a police or highway safety vehicle or an emergency
    vehicle, including fire, ambulance and search and rescue vehicles, in
    respect of an emergency;
    (c.1) is operating a law enforcement vehicle for the purpose of
    conducting routine patrols;
    (d) is operating a trail maintenance vehicle; or
    (e) holds a permit which authorizes the person to operate the
    motorized vehicle on the trail. (EC760/03; 308/06)
3.1 Every person who contravenes section 3 is guilty of an offence and        Offence and penalty
is liable, on summary conviction, to a fine of $225. (EC308/06)
4. The Minister may authorize signs to be posted on the trail by the trail    Signs
manager or his or her agent to
    (a) prescribe maximum rates of speed for snowmobiling;
    (b) permit, regulate or prohibit parking of any vehicle at park access
    points;
    (c) require stops by a snowmobile or bicycle;
    (d) close the trail or sections of it;
    (e) limit the hours during which the trail or a section of it may be
    used;
    (f) warn trail users of particular hazards or conditions;
    (g) direct or control the use of the trail by pedestrians or vehicles;
    (h) permit, regulate or prohibit use of the trail or sections of it by
    persons riding or leading saddled horses. (EC760/03)




                                    3
