                         PLEASE NOTE
This document, prepared by the Legislative Counsel Office, is an office
consolidation of this Act, current to November 1, 2003. It is intended for
information and reference purposes only.

This document is not the official version of the Act. The Act and the
amendments as printed under the authority of the Queen’s Printer for the
province should be consulted to determine the authoritative statement of the
law.

For more information concerning the history of this Act, please see the
Table of Public Acts.

If you find any errors or omissions in this consolidation, please contact:

                          Legislative Counsel Office
                             Tel: (902) 368-4291
                         Email: legislation@gov.pe.ca
                           CHAPTER W-2

                   WATER AND SEWERAGE ACT


1. In this Act                                                                 Definitions

    (a) “Commission” means the Island Regulatory and Appeals                   Commission
    Commission established under section 2 of the Island Regulatory
    and Appeals Commission Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap. I-11;
    (b) “person” includes an association, a body corporate, a partnership,     person
    and a municipality;
    (c) “public utility” means any person engaged in constructing,             public utility
    altering, extending, managing or controlling any system for
    providing the service of water or sewerage or water and sewerage
    for the public in any area within Prince Edward Island. R.S.P.E.I.
    1974, Cap. W-2, s.1; 1983, c.33, s.66l 1991, c.18, s.22.
2. (1) Notwithstanding any statute of this province, the Commission has        Powers of
and shall exercise general supervision and control over all public utilities   Commission

as defined in this Act, and the provisions of the Island Regulatory and
Appeals Commission Act extend and apply to the Commission in the
exercise of the duties imposed by this Act. .
  (2) Notwithstanding subsection (1), the Commission does not have             Powers of
general supervision and control over sewerage and water of                     Commission

Charlottetown, City of Summerside or the Towns of Charlottetown
South or Charlottetown West and in relation to those utilities this Act
shall apply as if for references to the Commission there were substituted
references to the relevant municipal council. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. W-2,
s.2; 1991, c.18, s.22; 1994, c.66, s.1 {eff.} March 31/95.
3. Before commencing the construction, alteration, or extension of any         Permit for public
water or sewerage system, every public utility shall obtain from the           utility

Commission a permit in writing authorizing the same, and shall submit to
the Commission at least one copy of all plans, engineer's reports and
estimates of costs, together with such other information and data as the
Commission may require. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. W-2, s.3; 1988, c.68,
s.1.
4. The Commission may approve any application in whole or in part and          Approval of
may amend or vary the same as it sees fit. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. W-2,          Commission

s.4; 1988, c.68, s.1.




                                     1
2                       Cap. W-2                   Water and Sewerage Act



                        5. When the Commission approves, amends or varies an application, it
Issuance of permit
                        shall issue a permit to the public utility which shall carry out the work
                        according to any conditions of the permit. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. W-2,
                        s.5; 1988, c.68, s.1.
Equipment and           6. No equipment or material shall be used in the construction, extension
material to comply      or alteration of any water or sewerage system that does not comply with
                        the requirements of the Commission. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. W-2, s.6.
Entry on private        7. When the Commission finds that it is in the public interest that any
property                public utility locate any portion of any water or sewerage system on
                        private property and that no agreement can be reached with the owner of
                        the property, the Commission may order, on such terms and conditions
                        and subject to the payment of such compensation, if any, as may seem
                        just, that the public utility have leave to enter upon the private property
                        and there locate any portion of any water or sewerage system and have
                        access thereto at all times for repairing, operating or maintaining the
                        same, but at no time doing unnecessary damage. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap.
                        W-2, s.7.
Measurement of          8. The Commission may prescribe the method by which any service
service                 under this Act shall be measured and may require any public utility to
                        install all equipment and fittings necessary to comply with such method
                        and may make regulations governing the classification of the methods of
                        measurement and determining the person or persons to whom the
                        classifications apply. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. W-2, s.8.
Rates and charges       9. Notwithstanding any statute of this province or any agreement or
fixed by                usage to the contrary all rates and charges for the supplying of water or
Commission
                        sewage disposal shall be fixed and determined by or approved by the
                        Commission. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. W-2, s.9.
Basis for rates and     10. (1) The rates and charges shall be fixed and determined in
charges                 accordance with the generally accepted public utility practices after
                        taking into consideration local conditions and circumstances.
Classification &          (2) Where considered necessary by the Commission such rates and
prescription of rates   charges may be classified and prescribed as follows:
& charges
                            (a) an initial charge for constructing and establishing connection
                            from the main water or sewerage line of a public utility to any
                            building or structure on the land and premises of any person for the
                            purpose of supplying water or sewage disposal;
                            (b) monthly, quarterly or other periodical rates or charges for
                            supplying water to a premises based on the method of measurement
                            prescribed by the Commission in accordance with section 8;




                                                             2
                           Water and Sewerage Act                  Cap. W-2                        3



    (c) monthly, quarterly or other periodical rates and charges for
    sewage disposal where the Commission considers the same to be
    necessary and equitable;
    (d) such other rates and charges for construction or for service
    provided as the Commission may approve. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. W-
    2, s.10.
10.1 For the purposes of this Act, a person along whose lands run sewer       Service deemed to
or water mains shall be deemed to receive service, be supplied with           be received

water or provided with sewerage disposal, as the case may be,
notwithstanding that such sewer or water mains are not physically
connected by lateral lines to any residence, building or other structure
situate upon the said lands of such person. 1989, c.9, s.2 {eff. June 12,
1980}.
11. (1) Every public utility shall carry a proper and adequate depreciation   Depreciation
account when the Commission, after investigation, shall determine that        account

the depreciation account can be reasonably required.
  (2) The Commission shall ascertain and determine what are proper and        Rates of
adequate rates of depreciation for the several classes of property or         depreciation,
                                                                              determination of
material of each public utility. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. W-2, s.11.
12. The Commission may prescribe the forms of all books, accounts,            Form of records
papers and records required to be kept by a public utility, and every         prescribed by
                                                                              Commission
public utility is required to keep and render its books, accounts, records
and papers accurately and faithfully in the manner and form prescribed
by the Commission and to comply with all directions of the Commission
relating to the books, accounts, papers and records. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap.
W-2, s.12.
13. The Commission may cause to be prepared suitable blank forms and          Forms, reports on
shall, when necessary, furnish the forms to each public utility, which        by public utility

shall make thereon such reports to the Commission as it may require.
R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. W-2, s.13.
14. The Commission may direct that a public utility shall make certain        Amortization for
provisions for the amortization of any sums allowed for organization          organization
                                                                              expenses
expenses and expenses of valuation, and may direct that the sum required
annually for the amortization shall be charged as an operating expense.
R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. W-2, s.14.
15. (1) When any public utility wishes to vary any existing rates, or         Schedule of new
charges, or to establish any new rates or charges it shall submit for the     rates presented to
                                                                              Commission
approval of the Commission a schedule of the proposed rates and
charges.



                                     3
4                     Cap. W-2                   Water and Sewerage Act



                         (2) The Commission may approve the schedule of rates, and charges
Approval of rates &
charges
                      either in whole or in part, or may amend or vary the same as it sees fit.
Effect of approval
                        (3) On the approval the rates and charges are the lawful rates and
                      charges of the public utility until altered or modified under this Act.
                      R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. W-2, s.15; 1988, c.68, s.2.
Service rules and     16. (1) All rules and regulations of any public utility relating to the kind
regulations, powers   of service to be supplied to customers and the manner by which the
of Commission
                      service shall be supplied, shall be subject to approval by the Commission
                      and, after approval, those rules and regulations shall govern the service.
Commission, power       (2) Notwithstanding subsection (1), the Commission may make rules
to make rules and     and regulations relating to the kind of service and the manner by which
regulations
                      the service shall be supplied to customers of a public utility. 1988, c.68,
                      s.3.
Interim approval      17. When a public utility submits for the approval of the Commission a
where no previous     schedule of rates and charges that apply only to a service for which no
schedule
                      schedule of rates and charges has previously been approved, the
                      Commission may grant an interim approval of the schedule, and
                      thereafter until otherwise ordered by the Commission, the schedule of
                      rates and charges are the lawful rates and charges to be made by the
                      public utility with respect to the services therein mentioned. R.S.P.E.I.
                      1974, Cap. W-2, s.16.
Public hearing        18. The Commission may order a public hearing in respect of any
                      schedule of rates and charges submitted for approval under this Act, and
                      reasonable notice thereof shall be given to such public utility and to the
                      public. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. W-2, s.17.
Written complaint     19. Upon written complaint to the Commission, against any public
against rates, etc.   utility, by any five persons, that any of the rates, charges or schedules,
                      whether fixed by or the subject of a signed contract or agreement or
                      otherwise, are unreasonable or discriminatory, or that any regulation,
                      practice or act affecting or relating to the supplying of water and
                      sewerage, or any services in connection therewith are unreasonable,
                      insufficient, or discriminatory or that the service is inadequate, or
                      unobtainable, the Commission shall, after notice to the public utility,
                      investigate such complaint, and may order that such rates, charges or
                      schedules be modified or altered, or that the regulations, measurement,
                      practice or acts be modified or changed, or may order, on such terms and
                      subject to such conditions as may seem just, that the public utility furnish
                      reasonable and adequate service and facilities and make such alterations,
                      extensions and additions as may be required. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. W-2,
                      s.18.


                                                           4
                           Water and Sewerage Act                   Cap. W-2                       5



20. The Commission, when called upon to institute any investigation,
                                                                               Deposit to cover
may in its discretion, require from the complainants, the deposit of a         costs of
reasonable amount of money or other security to cover the costs of the         investigation
investigation, which money shall be dealt with as the Commission may
direct should the decision be given against the complainants. R.S.P.E.I.
1974, Cap. W-2, s.19.
21. When in the opinion of the Commission any ground exists for a              Investigation of
complaint against any public utility, the Commission may, on its own           complaint by
                                                                               Commission
motion, investigate such ground in the same manner and with the same
powers as are set forth in section 19. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. W-2, s.20.
22. For the purpose of carrying out its duties under this Act the              Inspection of
Commission by its engineers, accountants, valuators and others shall           records etc. by
                                                                               Commission
have access, at all reasonable hours, to inspect all books, records,
equipment and material of any public utility. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. W-2,
s.21.
23. Subject to this Act no person shall knowingly solicit, accept or           No free or lesser
receive any rebate, concession or discrimination with respect to any           rates than in
                                                                               schedule
service or affecting or relating to any public utility whereby any such
services are, by any device whatsoever, rendered free or at a lesser rate
than named in the schedule in force, as provided herein, or whereby any
service or advantage is received other than as is herein specified.
R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. W-2, s.22.
24. (1) If any person serviced with water and sewerage by any public           Discontinuance of
utility neglects or refuses to pay the amount of the rates or charges due      service

for the same, the public utility may discontinue the service and stop the
water supply.
  (2) Where the public utility discontinues the service and stops the          Removal of meters
water supply the officers or agents of the public utility may after forty-     & disconnect pipes

eight hours notice, enter the premises of such person between the hours
of nine o'clock in the forenoon and four o'clock in the afternoon, and
separate and take away any meter or other equipment belonging to the
public utility, and disconnect any pipes or fittings, whether its property
or not, from the system of such public utility. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. W-2,
s.23.
25. If a customer of any public utility installs or connects or is desirous    Detrimental
of installing or connecting any service or equipment which, in the             equipment to
                                                                               service of public
opinion of the public utility, is or may be detrimental to the service being   utility
rendered, the matter may be referred to the Commission and the
Commission may make such order thereon as appears reasonable and
just. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. W-2, s.24.


                                     5
6                      Cap. W-2                   Water and Sewerage Act



                       26. Every person or public utility neglecting or refusing to obey, comply
Penalty for offences
                       with or carry into effect any rule or order of the Commission, made
                       under this Act, or who violates any provision of this Act for which no
                       penalty is provided is liable to a penalty of not less than $5 nor more than
                       $500, which may be imposed by the Commission, and if the same is not
                       paid within fifteen days after the imposition thereof, the Commission
                       may proceed to collect the same in the same manner as is prescribed for
                       the recovery of assessment under the Island Regulatory and Appeals
                       Commission Act. R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. W-2, s.25; 1991, c.18, s.22.
Penalties to go to     27. Every penalty or fine imposed or collected under this Act goes to and
consolidated           forms part of the Consolidated Fund of the province. R.S.P.E.I. 1974,
revenue
                       Cap. W-2, s.26.
Judicial review        28. Notwithstanding section 26, proceedings in the Supreme Court by
                       way of application for judicial review lie against any person or public
                       utility which fails to carry out any order of the Commission made under
                       this Act or which performs or commences to perform any act in
                       contravention of any order of the Commission made under this Act.
                       R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. W-2, s.27.




                                                            6
