                         PLEASE NOTE
This document, prepared by the Legislative Counsel Office, is an office
consolidation of this Act, current to March 13, 2010. It is intended for
information and reference purposes only.

This document is not the official version of the Act. The Act and the
amendments as printed under the authority of the Queen’s Printer for the
province should be consulted to determine the authoritative statement of the
law.

For more information concerning the history of this Act, please see the
Table of Public Acts.

If you find any errors or omissions in this consolidation, please contact:

                         Legislative Counsel Office
                            Tel: (902) 368-4291
                        Email: legislation@gov.pe.ca
                         CHAPTER W-4.1

                 WILDLIFE CONSERVATION ACT


                            INTERPRETATION

1. (1) In this Act                                                           Definitions

    (a) “aboriginal person” means a person who                               aboriginal person
       (i) is registered as an Indian pursuant to the Indian Act R.S.C.
       1985, Chap. I-5, or
       (ii) is a registered member of a bona fide aboriginal organization
       that requires as a condition of membership proof of aboriginal
       ancestry;
    (b) “angling” means fishing with a line to which one or more hooks       angling
    are attached and that is held in the hand or attached to a rod that is
    held in the hand or closely attended;
    (c) “bow” means a tool for projecting arrows which consists of a         bow
    handle and one or more flexible limbs which are held bent by a
    string or cable which is drawn, pulled or released or held in a drawn
    position by hand or hand-held release and not by any mechanical
    device attached to any portion of the bow other than the bowstring;
    (c.1) “cadet conservation officer” means a cadet conservation officer    cadet conservation
    appointed under subsection 3.2(1);                                       officer

    (c.2) “Chief Conservation Officer” means the Chief Conservation          Chief Conservation
    Officer appointed under subsection 3.1(1);                               Officer

    (d) “closed season” means a specified period during which fish,          closed season
    game and fur-bearing animals are not to be taken or hunted under
    this Act;
    (e) “conservation officer” means a conservation officer appointed        conservation officer
    under subsection 3.1(1), and includes the Chief Conservation
    Officer;
    (f) “endangered species” means a species that is designated as an        endangered species
    endangered species in the regulations;
    (g) “exotic” in relation to wildlife, means any wildlife of a species    exotic
    or type that is not indigenous to the province and that in its natural
    habitat is usually found wild in nature, but does not include ratite
    birds;
    (g.1) “extinct species” means a species that no longer exists;           extinct species




                                    1
2                     Cap. W-4.1                Wildlife Conservation Act



extirpated species        (g.2) “extirpated species” means a species that no longer exists in
                          the wild of this province but exists elsewhere in the wild;
firearm                   (h) “firearm” means a barrelled weapon from which a shot, bullet or
                          other projectile can be discharged and that is capable of causing
                          serious bodily injury or death to a person, and includes a frame or
                          receiver of such weapon and anything that can be adapted for use as
                          a firearm;
fish                      (i) “fish” where used as a noun, means any species of fish protected
                          by regulations made under this Act, and where used as a verb, means
                          to angle;
fishery regulations       (j) “fishery regulations” means the regulations made under the
                          Fisheries Act (Canada) R.S.C. 1985, Chap. F-14;
fishing preserve          (k) “fishing preserve” means land on which, or part of which, fish
                          have been reared or stocked;
fur-bearing animals       (l) “fur-bearing animals” means animals that are designated as fur-
                          bearing animals in the regulations;
fur farm                  (m) “fur farm” means any place where fur-bearing animals are kept
                          in captivity and are bred and sold for, gain or profit;
game                      (n) “game” means any wildlife designated as game by the
                          regulations;
game animal               (o) “game animal” means an animal designated as a game animal in
                          the regulations;
game bird                 (p) “game bird” means a bird of a species or type designated as a
                          game bird in the regulations;
hunting                   (q) “hunting” means any chasing, driving, flushing, attracting,
                          pursuing, worrying, following after or on the trail of, searching for,
                          trapping, attempting to trap, snaring or attempting to snare, shooting
                          at, stalking or lying in wait for any wildlife whether or not the
                          wildlife is then or subsequently captured, killed, taken or wounded,
                          but does not include stalking, attracting, searching for or lying in
                          wait for any wildlife by an unarmed person solely for the purpose of
                          watching or taking pictures of it;
justice                   (r) “justice” means a justice of the peace or a provincial court judge
                          appointed under the Provincial Court Act R.S.P.E.I 1988, Cap. P-25;
license                   (s) “license” means a valid and subsisting license issued under this
                          Act;
loaded firearm            (t) “loaded firearm” means a firearm that has a propellant powder,
                          projectile or cartridge that


                                                           2
                      Wildlife Conservation Act               Cap. W-4.1                      3



  (i) is capable of being discharged from the firearm, and
  (ii) is contained in the breech or firing chamber or in a cartridge
  magazine attached to or inserted into the firearm;
(u) “migratory birds” means migratory birds as defined in the              migratory birds
Migratory Birds Convention Act (Canada) R.S.C. 1985, Chap. M-7
and regulations thereunder;
(v) “Minister” means the Minister of Environment, Energy and               Minister
Forestry;
(v.1) “natural resource inspector” means a natural resource inspector      Natural resource
appointed under subsection 3.1(1);                                         inspector

(w) “open season” means a specified period during which fish, game         open season
and fur-bearing animals may be lawfully taken or hunted under this
Act;
(x) “owner” means                                                          owner
   (i) the owner of any real or personal property, or
   (ii) the lessee or other person having possession or control of real
   or personal property;
(y) “permit” means a valid and subsisting permit issued under this         permit
Act;
(z) repealed by 2008,c.64,s.1;                                             regulations

(aa) “resident” means a person who                                         resident
   (i) has resided in the province for a period of six months
   immediately prior to making an application for a licence,
   (ii) has resided in the province for a period of two weeks
   immediately prior to making an application for a licence, where
   that person proves to the satisfaction of the Minister that he or she
   was required to take up residence in the province as a result of
   being transferred to the province by his or her employer,
   (iii) is taking educational training of a three-month minimum
   duration within the province and has resided in the province for a
   period of two weeks immediately prior to making an application
   for a licence,
   (iv) is taking educational training outside the province and resided
   in the province for a period of six months immediately prior to
   taking the educational training,
   (v) proves to the satisfaction of the Minister that he or she has
   resided in the province for the purpose of employment for an
   aggregate period of six months within the twelve months
   immediately preceding the making of an application, or




                                 3
4                    Cap. W-4.1                 Wildlife Conservation Act



                            (vi) was born in the province and owns real property in the
                            province;
shooting preserve        (bb) “shooting preserve” means land on which, or part of which,
                         game birds that have been raised in captivity are released for the
                         purpose of hunting;
species of special       (bb.1) “species of special concern” means a species that is
concern                  designated as a species of special concern in the regulations;
snare                    (cc) “snare” means any device for the taking of wildlife in which the
                         wildlife is caught in a noose;
taking                   (dd) “taking” means capturing, killing or taking into possession any
                         wildlife, whether dead or alive;
threatened species       (ee) “threatened species” means a species that is designated as a
                         threatened species in the regulations;
trap                     (ff) “trap” means a snare, spring trap, deadfall, box trap, net or any
                         other device used to capture wildlife;
trapping                 (gg) “trapping” means taking or attempting to take wildlife by
                         means of a trap, whether the wildlife is killed or not;
vehicle                  (hh) “vehicle” means a motor vehicle as defined in the Highway
                         Traffic Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap.H-5;
vulnerable species       (ii) repealed by 2004,c.23,s.1.
wildlife                 (jj) “wildlife” means wild life, wild mammals, birds, reptiles,
                         amphibians, fish, invertebrates, plants, fungi, algae, bacteria and
                         other wild organisms as prescribed by the regulations;
wildlife habitat         (kk) “wildlife habitat” means breeding, nursery, feeding and
                         migration areas and includes areas that provide food, cover or water.
Possession             (2) For the purpose of this Act
                         (a) a person is in possession of a thing when it is in that person’s
                         personal possession or when that person knowingly
                              (i) has it in the actual possession or custody of another person,
                              or
                              (ii) has it in any place, whether or not that place belongs to or is
                              occupied by that person, for the use or benefit of that person or
                              of another person;
                         (b) when one of two or more persons, with the knowledge and
                         consent of the rest has anything in that person’s custody or
                         possession, it is in the possession of each and all of them.
                         1998,c.107,s.1;       2000,c.5,s.3;    2001,c.59,s.1;     2004,c.36,s.3;
                         2004,c.23,s.1; 2008,c.64,s.1.


                                                           4
                           Wildlife Conservation Act               Cap. W-4.1                       5



2. (1) Subject to subsection (2), the property in all wildlife situate within   Ownership of
the province, while in a state of nature, is hereby declared to be vested in    wildlife

Her Majesty in right of the province and no person shall acquire any
right or property therein otherwise than in accordance with this Act and
the regulations.
  (2) A person who lawfully takes wildlife and complies with all                Property right of
applicable provisions of this Act and the regulations acquires the right of     individual

property in that wildlife.
   (3) Notwithstanding anything in this Act, no right of action lies and no     No action against
right of compensation exists against Her Majesty in right of the province       province

for death, personal injury or property damage caused by wildlife, or any
wildlife that escapes or is released from captivity or is abandoned within
the province. 1998,c.107,s.2.

                             ADMINISTRATION

3. (1) The Minister is responsible for the administration of this Act.          Administration of
                                                                                Act
  (2) The Minister may, in writing,                                             Designation or
    (a) designate persons to act on his or her behalf; and                      delegation by
                                                                                Minister
    (b) delegate to any person any of the functions of the Minister under
    this Act.
  (2.1) A written designation or delegation issued by the Minister under        Designation or
subsection (2) remains in effect until revoked by the Minister.                 delegation in effect
                                                                                until revoked

  (3) The Minister may                                                          Powers
    (a) undertake, promote or recommend measures allowing for public
    co-operation in wildlife conservation;
    (b) co-ordinate and implement wildlife policies and programs in co-
    operation with a federal, provincial or municipal government or
    agency thereof;
    (c) co-ordinate the development and implementation of policies and
    programs designed to protect and conserve wildlife and wildlife
    habitat;
    (d) develop and implement suitable programs of education, safety,
    training and certification for hunters and trappers;
    (e) enter into an agreement with any person to provide for the
    undertaking of
         (i) conservation programs and measures and the administration
         of lands for such purposes,
         (ii) wildlife research by persons authorized by the Minister;




                                      5
6                      Cap. W-4.1                Wildlife Conservation Act



                           (f) take such measures as the Minister considers necessary for the
                           protection of endangered, threatened or vulnerable wildlife and their
                           habitat;
                           (g) initiate conferences and meetings respecting wildlife;
                           (h) develop suitable guidelines and standards to optimize the impacts
                           of land use practices on wildlife and wildlife habitat.1998,c.107,s.3;
                           2008,c.64,s.2.
Chief Conservation     3.1 (1) There may be appointed in accordance with the Civil Service Act
Officer,               R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap. C-8 a Chief Conservation Officer, conservation
conservation
officers and natural   officers, natural resource inspectors and such other employees as the
resource inspectors    Minister considers necessary for the administration of this Act and
                       regulations.
Qualifications for       (2) No person shall be appointed as Chief Conservation Officer or as a
appointment            conservation officer unless the person has the qualifications in respect of
                       the appointment that are required by the regulations.
Appointments in          (3) Notice shall be published in the Gazette of every appointment of a
Gazette                conservation officer.
Oath or affirmation      (4) A conservation officer, before commencing the performance of his
of office              or her duties, shall take the oath or solemn affirmation of office as
                       prescribed by the regulations.
Identification card      (5) The Chief Conservation Officer shall ensure that an identification
                       card containing the information required by the regulations is issued to a
                       conservation officer before the conservation officer commences the
                       performance of his or her duties.
Conservation             (6) The following persons are conservation officers by virtue of their
officers               office:
                            (a) an officer or member of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police;
                            (b) a game officer designated under the Migratory Birds Convention
                            Act (Canada) R.S.C. 1985, c. M-7;
                            (c) a fisheries officer appointed under the Fisheries Act (Canada)
                            R.S.C. 1985, c. F-14;
                            (d) a park warden designated under the Canada National Parks Act,
                            S.C. 2000, c. 32.
Transitional,            (7) Every person who, immediately before the day this section comes
conservation           into force, holds an appointment as a conservation officer, shall be
officers
                       deemed to have been appointed as a conservation officer under
                       subsection (1).
Application              (8) For greater certainty, subsections (2), (3) and (4) do not apply in
                       respect of any person referred to in subsection (7). 2008,c.64,s.3.


                                                            6
                          Wildlife Conservation Act             Cap. W-4.1                         7



3.2 (1) The Minister may appoint cadet conservation officers as the          Cadet conservation
Minister considers necessary for the administration of this Act and the      officers

regulations, in accordance with the requirements set out in the
regulations.
  (2) Notice shall be published in the Gazette of every appointment of a     Appointments in
cadet conservation officer.                                                  Gazette


  (3) The appointment of a cadet conservation officer shall                  Conditions or
    (a) be in writing; and                                                   restrictions on
                                                                             appointment
    (b) specify any conditions or restrictions that are attached to the
    appointment.
  (4) The term of an appointment of a cadet conservation officer expires     Term of
on the date specified in the appointment unless the Minister sooner          appointment

revokes the appointment.
  (5) Every cadet conservation officer, before commencing the                Oath or affirmation
performance of his or her duties, shall take the oath or solemn              of office

affirmation of office as prescribed by the regulations.
  (6) The Chief Conservation Officer shall ensure that an identification     Identification card
card containing the information required by the regulations is issued to a
cadet conservation officer before the cadet conservation officer
commences the performance of his or her duties. 2008,c.64,s.3.
4. (1) The Chief Conservation Officer, conservation officers, cadet          Powers and duties
conservation officers, natural resource inspectors and any other
employees appointed under subsection 3.1(1) may exercise the powers
and shall perform the duties
    (a) set out in this Act and the regulations; and
    (b) as may from time to time be assigned by the Minister.
  (2) The Chief Conservation Officer                                         Powers and duties
    (a) shall supervise conservation officers in the exercise of their       of Chief
                                                                             Conservation
    powers and the performance of their duties; and                          Officer
    (b) may exercise the powers and perform the duties of a
    conservation officer,
under this Act and the regulations and any other enactment.
  (3) A conservation officer                                                 Powers and duties
    (a) may exercise the powers and shall perform the duties of a
    conservation officer under this Act and the regulations, in
    accordance with the general policy directions issued by the Minister;
    and
    (b) may exercise the powers and shall perform the duties held by a
    conservation officer under any other enactment by virtue of his or


                                     7
8                      Cap. W-4.1                Wildlife Conservation Act



                           her office under this Act, in accordance with the general policy
                           directions issued by
                              (i) the Minister, if the Minister is responsible for the
                              administration of the other enactment, or
                              (ii) the Minister in consultation with the Minister responsible for
                              the administration of the other enactment.
Function of cadet        (4) A cadet conservation officer shall, when accompanied by and
conservation officer   under the direct supervision of a conservation officer, assist the
                       conservation officer in the exercise of the powers and the performance of
                       the duties of the conservation officer under this Act and the regulations
                       and any other enactment.
Production of            (5) A conservation officer or cadet conservation officer shall, on
identification card    demand by any person, produce his or her identification card for
                       inspection, unless in the opinion of the conservation officer or cadet
                       conservation officer it would be dangerous for the conservation officer or
                       cadet conservation officer to comply with the demand. 1998,c.107,s.4;
                       2004,c.23,s.2; 2006,c.16,s.63(14)(a); 2008,c.64,s.4,5.
Function of natural    4.1 A natural resource inspector shall perform the following functions:
resource inspector         (a) the management and monitoring of wildlife and wildlife habitat,
                           including, but not limited to, wildlife health and populations and
                           human impact on wildlife and wildlife habitat;
                           (b) the conduct of inspections for the purpose of ensuring
                           compliance with this Act and the regulations;
                           (c) the issuance of licenses and permits under this Act and the
                           regulations, if the Minister has delegated the power to issue licenses
                           and permits to the natural resource inspector. 2008,c.64,s.6.
Peace officer          5. (1) A conservation officer is a peace officer, and has all the powers,
                       authority, privileges, rights and immunities of a peace officer under the
                       common law, the Criminal Code (Canada) and any other federal or
                       provincial enactment, for the purposes of
                           (a) exercising the powers and performing the duties of a
                           conservation officer under this Act or the regulations; and
                           (b) exercising the powers and performing the duties held by a
                           conservation officer under any other enactment by virtue of his or
                           her office under this Act.
Assistance               (2) A conservation officer, while
                           (a) exercising the powers and performing the duties of a
                           conservation officer under this Act or the regulations; and
                           (b) exercising the powers and performing the duties held by a
                           conservation officer under any other enactment by virtue of his or
                           her office under this Act,


                                                            8
                          Wildlife Conservation Act              Cap. W-4.1                        9



may call upon any person for assistance and that person, while giving the
assistance, is a conservation officer for the purposes of this Act, the
regulations or the other enactment.
  (3) Repealed by 2008,c.64,s.7(b).                                           Identification

  (4) Repealed         by        2008,c.64,s.7(b).         1998,c.107,s.5;    Offence
2006,c.16,s.63(14)(b); 2008,c.64,s.7.
5.1 (1) No action or other proceeding for damages lies or shall be            Liability of
instituted against                                                            Minister, person
                                                                              appointed or
     (a) the Minister;                                                        designated
     (b) any cadet conservation officer;
     (c) any person designated by the Minister to act on his or her behalf
     under clause 3(2)(a);
     (d) any person delegated any function of the Minister under clause
     3(2)(b); or
     (e) any other person, other than a conservation officer or a natural
     resource inspector,
for anything done in good faith in the performance or intended
performance of any duty or in the exercise or in the intended exercise of
any power under this Act, or for any neglect or default in the
performance or exercise in good faith of any such duty or power.
  (2) No action or other proceeding for damages lies or shall be              Liability of
instituted against a conservation officer or natural resource inspector for   conservation officer

anything done in good faith in the performance or intended performance
of any duty or in the exercise or intended exercise of any power
     (a) under this Act or the regulations; or
     (b) under any other enactment under which a conservation officer
     has powers and duties by virtue of his or her office under this Act,
or for any neglect or default in the performance or exercise of any such
duty or power.
  (3) A conservation officer who is charged with an offence under a           Conservation
provincial enactment shall not be convicted if it is made to appear to the    officer may not be
                                                                              convicted
justice before whom the offence is being prosecuted that the
conservation officer
     (a) committed the offence while discharging his or her
     responsibilities;
     (b) was reasonably justified in committing the offence having
     regard to the responsibility being discharged; and
     (c) conducted himself or herself in a reasonable manner having
     regard to all of the circumstances.




                                      9
10                    Cap. W-4.1                 Wildlife Conservation Act



Person appointed or     (4) A natural resource inspector who is charged with an offence under
delegated may not     a provincial enactment shall not be convicted if it is made to appear to
be convicted
                      the justice before whom the offence is being prosecuted that the person
                      charged
                           (a) committed the offence while discharging his or her
                           responsibilities;
                           (b) was reasonably justified in committing the offence having
                           regard to the responsibility being discharged; and
                           (c) conducted himself or herself in a reasonable manner having
                           regard     to     all  of     the     circumstances. 2004,c.23,s.3;
                           2006,c.16,s.63(14)(c); 2008,c.64,s.8.
Evidence of           5.2 (1) A document purporting to be issued and signed by the Minister
authorization         authorizing the person to whom it is issued to
                           (a) act as the Minister’s designate; or
                           (b) perform any functions of the Minister delegated by the Minister,
                      is, without proof of the Minister’s appointment, authority or signature,
                      admissible in evidence and is in the absence of evidence to the contrary,
                      proof of the matters stated in the document.
Evidence of             (2) A document purporting to be issued and signed by the Minister to
appointment           the effect that the person to whom it is issued has a current appointment
                      under section 3.1 or 3.2 is, without proof of the Minister’s appointment,
                      authority or signature, admissible in evidence and is in the absence of
                      evidence to the contrary, proof of the matters stated in the document.
Identification card     (3) An identification card purporting to be issued and signed by the
                      Minister to the effect that the person to whom it is issued is a
                      conservation officer or a cadet conservation officer is, without proof of
                      the Minister’s appointment, authority or signature, admissible in
                      evidence and is in the absence of evidence to the contrary, proof of the
                      matters stated in the identification card.
Presumption of          (4) A person in possession of a document referred to in subsection (1)
identity              or (2) or an identification card referred to in subsection (3) shall, on
                      proof that his or her name is the same as the person named in the
                      document or identification card, be presumed, in the absence of evidence
                      to the contrary, to be the person named in the document or identification
                      card. 2008,c.64,s.9.
Wildlife inventory    6. The Minister shall monitor the state of wildlife and, in 1997 and
and report            within the first three years of each decade thereafter, shall provide to the
                      Lieutenant Governor in Council a report which includes
                          (a) an inventory of wildlife habitat, including wetland, sand dune
                          and riverine habitat, and recommendations to conserve and enhance
                          that habitat;


                                                            10
                           Wildlife Conservation Act               Cap. W-4.1                    11



    (b) a summary of wildlife initiatives and programs for both Crown
    land and private land implemented during each year of the 10 year
    reporting period;
    (c) an assessment of the state of wildlife resources and in particular,
    endangered and threatened species and species of special concern;
    and
    (d) an analysis of the effect of land use and environmental activities
    on wildlife and wildlife habitat. 1998,c.107,s.6; 2004,c.23,s.4.

 ENDANGERED AND THREATENED SPECIES AND SPECIES OF
                SPECIAL CONCERN
7. (1) Where the Minister considers that a species of wildlife is               Endangered species
threatened with imminent extinction, the Lieutenant Governor in Council
may, by regulations, designate the species as an endangered species.
  (2) Where the Minister considers that a species of wildlife is likely to      Threatened species
become endangered if the factors affecting its vulnerability are not
reversed, the Lieutenant Governor in Council may, by regulations,
designate the species as a threatened species.
  (3) Where the Minister considers that a species of wildlife is of special     Species of special
concern due to characteristics that make it particularly sensitive to human     concern

activities or natural events, the Lieutenant Governor in Council may, by
regulations, designate the species as a species of special concern.
  (4) Except where authorized by a permit under section 10, no person           Offence
shall
     (a) kill, injure, possess, disturb, take or interfere with or attempt to
     kill, injure, possess, disturb, take or interfere with an endangered or
     threatened species;
     (b) possess for sale, offer for sale, sell, buy, trade or barter any
     individual, or part, derivative, or developmental stage of any
     individual, belonging to an endangered, or threatened species;
     (c) destroy, disturb or interfere with or attempt to destroy, disturb or
     interfere with the wildlife habitat of any individual belonging to an
     endangered or threatened species. 1998,c.107,s.7; 2004,c.23,s.6.
8. The Minister may                                                             Powers to create
    (a) establish an advisory committee                                         advisory committee
                                                                                and take other
       (i) to advise the Minister on the creation of a list of endangered       conservation
       and threatened species and species of special concern based on           measures
       biological and scientific information,
       (ii) to assess the state of wildlife resources and in particular,
       endangered and threatened species and species of special concern,



                                      11
12                Cap. W-4.1                Wildlife Conservation Act



                         (iii) to analyse the effect of land use and environmental activities
                         on wildlife and wildlife habitat,
                      and to make recommendations for the conservation of wildlife and
                      wildlife habitat;
                      (b) acquire land necessary for the protection of endangered and
                      threatened species;
                      (c) make agreements with landowners and conservation groups for
                      the protection and recovery of endangered and threatened species.
                      1998,c.107,s.8; 2004,c.23,s.7.

                                              MIGRATORY BIRDS

Migratory birds   9. A person may hunt, take and be in possession of migratory birds in the
                  province in accordance with the provisions of the Migratory Birds
                  Convention Act (Canada) and regulations. 1998,c.107,s.9.

                                           PERMITS AND LICENSES

Permits           10. (1) The Minister may, on such terms and conditions as the Minister
                  thinks fit, issue a permit authorizing the holder
                      (a) to trap or kill any wildlife specified in the permit;
                      (a.1) to capture and mark any wildlife specified in the permit;
                      (a.2) to be in possession of the green hide, carcass or any portion of
                      a fur-bearing animal;
                      (b) to import, export or engage in the interprovincial transportation
                      of any wildlife;
                      (c) to salvage dead wildlife for educational, ornamental or other
                      purposes;
                      (d) to collect or possess an endangered and threatened species and
                      species of special concern for scientific, educational or other
                      purposes related to the conservation of that species;
                      (e) to remove or destroy a beaver dam.
Revocation          (2) The Minister may refuse to issue a permit to any person or may
                  revoke a permit for any contravention of this Act, the regulations or any
                  other enactment relating to wildlife.
Terms               (3) A permit is not transferable and expires on the date specified in the
                  permit. 1998,c.107,s.10; 2001,c.59,s.2; 2003,c.46,s.1,2; 2004,c.23,s.8.
Licenses          11. (1) The Minister may issue licenses to hunt, fish or trap and may
                  charge fees for a license as prescribed in the regulations.
Revocation          (2) The Minister may refuse to issue a license to any person or may
                  revoke a license for any contravention of this Act, the regulations or any
                  other enactment relating to wildlife.



                                                       12
                           Wildlife Conservation Act               Cap. W-4.1                       13



   (3) A license is not transferable and expires on the date specified in the   Terms
license. 1998,c.107,s.11; 2003,c.46,s.3.
12. (1) No person shall                                                         Permit, license
     (a) take trout or salmon by angling or by any other means;                 required

     (b) hunt any game, game bird or migratory game bird; or
     (c) trap any fur-bearing animal,
unless authorized to do so by a license or permit issued to that person
under this Act.
  (2) Subsection (1) does not apply to                                          Exception
    (a) aboriginal persons; or
    (b) persons under the age of sixteen years while angling for trout.
    1998,c.107,s.12; 2003,c.46,s.4.
13. No person under the age of sixteen years shall use or carry a loaded        Exception
firearm unless under the direct and immediate supervision of a person
over the age of eighteen years who holds the required authorizations
under this Act and the regulations, the Criminal Code (Canada) and the
Firearms Act (Canada). 1998,c.107,s.13; 2004,c.23,s.9; 2008,c.64,s.11.
14. Any resident having a valid trapping license may trap at such times         Trapping permitted
and at such places as may be designated by regulations. 1998,c.107,s.14.
14.1 Every person, when hunting, trapping or snaring wildlife or angling,       Production of
shall                                                                           license or permit

     (a) carry on his or her person the licence or permit under which the
     person is authorized to hunt, trap, snare or angle; and
     (b) produce the licence or permit for inspection upon the demand of
     a conservation officer or a natural resource inspector.
     2008,c.64,s.12.
15. No person shall                                                             Prohibitions
    (a) knowingly give false or misleading information, either orally or
    in writing to a conservation officer, natural resource inspector or
    license vendor acting under this Act or the regulations;
    (b) being the holder of any license or permit issued under this Act,
    neglect or refuse to produce it for examination when requested or
    required to do so by a conservation officer or natural resource
    inspector;
    (c) sell, transfer or assign a license issued to the person;
    (d) cause or permit his or her license to be used by another person;
    or
    (e) use the license of another person. 1998,c.107,s.15;
    2008,c.64,s.12.




                                      13
14                    Cap. W-4.1                 Wildlife Conservation Act



                                         FISHING AND SHOOTING PRESERVES
                                         AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT AREAS

Designation of land   16. (1) The Lieutenant Governor in Council may, by regulations,
by regulation         designate land
                          (a) as a fishing preserve to be maintained for the primary purpose of
                          angling;
                          (b) as a shooting preserve to be maintained for the primary purpose
                          of hunting;
                          (c) as a wildlife management area to be maintained for the
                          protection, management and conservation of wildlife and wildlife
                          habitat.
Public notice and       (2) No designation shall be made or revoked under clause (1)(c) unless
consultation          the Minister has first published a notice in the Gazette indicating the
                      intention to designate or revoke the designation of a wildlife
                      management area and has invited public representations on the matter.
Agreements              (3) The Minister may
                          (a) enter into agreements respecting cooperative programs for joint
                          management of wildlife and wildlife habitat the preservation,
                          maintenance and restoration of wildlife habitat and public access to
                          land;
                          (b) purchase lease or acquire title to land for wildlife;
                          (c) assess the impact of land use and management activities on
                          wildlife and wildlife habitat;
                          (d) prohibit alteration of wildlife habitat except as permitted by the
                          regulations or authorized by the Minister;
                          (e) designate particular areas as habitat for threatened or endangered
                          wildlife;
                          (f) designate certain wetlands, marshes and rivers as of historical and
                          biological value and regulate the standards for the preservation and
                          management of such designated areas. 1998,c.107,s.16.

                                           GOVERNMENT- STOCKED PONDS

Public angling        17. (1) Ponds and watercourses in which fish from government
                      hatcheries or rearing ponds are distributed free of charge shall, subject to
                      subsection (2), be open to the public for angling subject to the fishery
                      regulations.
Exception                (2) Subsection (1) does not apply at times when a pond or watercourse
                      is closed by a government agency for the purpose of any investigation or
                      experiment.
Ponds restored or       (3) Ponds restored or created by dams that the Government of Prince
created by dams       Edward Island may assist in any way to build, repair, maintain or restore


                                                            14
                           Wildlife Conservation Act             Cap. W-4.1                   15



shall be open to the public for angling subject to the prevailing fishery
regulations. 1998,c.107,s.17.

                      CONSERVATION AGREEMENTS

18. (1) For the purpose of protecting the habitat of wildlife the Minister    Agreements
may enter into an agreement with a private landowner.
  (2) An agreement under subsection (1) may impose a conservation             Conservation
covenant or easement in respect of land owned by the private landowner.       covenant or
                                                                              easement

  (3) A conservation covenant or easement may be granted for any of the       Purposes
following purposes:
     (a) the protection, enhancement or restoration of natural ecosystems,
     wildlife habitat or habitat of rare, threatened or endangered plant or
     animal species;
     (b) the retention of significant botanical, zoological, geological or
     morphological features of land;
     (c) the conservation of soil, air or water.
  (4) A conservation covenant or easement shall                               Terms
    (a) run with the land and be binding on the landowner and his or her
    successors in title;
    (b) have effect notwithstanding the absence of a dominant tenement
    that would benefit therefrom;
    (c) be either positive or negative in nature;
    (d) be enforceable by either party to the agreement or any
    conservation agency to which benefit of the covenant or easement is
    assigned by the agreement;
    (e) have effect for such period as is specified in the agreement and,
    if no period is specified, in perpetuity;
    (f) be registered as a deed under the Registry Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988,
    Cap. R-10.
  (5) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the Crown or       Grant of easement,
the owner of an estate in fee simple may grant a conservation covenant        etc.

or easement over their own land.
  (6) For the avoidance of doubt it is declared that the requirements of      Abrogation of
common law respecting restrictive covenants and easements do not apply        common law
                                                                              requirements
to a conservation covenant or easement created by an agreement under
this section. 1998,c.107,s.18.

                          PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES

19. (1) No person shall                                                       Offences




                                      15
16                    Cap. W-4.1                Wildlife Conservation Act



                          (a) take, hunt or kill any game or wildlife designated in the
                          regulations except as may be prescribed in the regulations or by the
                          Migratory Birds Convention Act or regulations or the fishery
                          regulations;
                          (b) feed any game taken or killed in the province to foxes, mink or
                          other animals;
                          (c) while engaged in hunting be in possession, or under the influence
                          of, an intoxicant;
                          (d) wilfully waste game taken in accordance with this Act or the
                          Migratory Birds Convention Act;
                          (e) subject to subsection (2), hunt on Sunday;
                          (f) shoot at any game within 200 metres of any school, church,
                          meeting place, farm building, occupied dwelling, or livestock,
                          without the permission of the owner thereof or shoot at any game
                          within 300 metres of a location where migratory birds are kept
                          pursuant to a permit issued under the Migratory Birds Convention
                          Act;
                          (g) while in or on any boat or floating blind have in possession a
                          loaded firearm unless the boat or floating blind is at anchor, beached
                          or being propelled by poles or paddles only;
                          (h) have a firearm that is not cased or broken in his or her
                          possession in the field between one hour after sunset and one hour
                          before sunrise unless authorized by a permit to hunt at night;
                          (i) discharge or have in his or her possession a loaded firearm while
                          in or on any vehicle;
                          (j) not being the owner of the land on which it is erected, remove,
                          destroy, disfigure or otherwise mutilate any sign erected lawfully
                          pursuant to this Act;
                          (k) obstruct, cause to obstruct, incite others to obstruct or assault a
                          conservation officer while the officer is exercising authority
                          pursuant to this Act or any other enactment;
                          (l) take any egg or young of any fish, bird or fur-bearing animal
                          unless authorized by the regulations;
                          (m) sell any wildlife or part, derivative, or developmental stage of
                          wildlife of such description as may be prescribed except fur-bearing
                          animals and snowshoe hare taken under an authority conferred by
                          this Act;
                          (n) exceed the bag limit or possession limit for a species of wildlife;
                          (o) do any other act that is prohibited by the regulations.
Exception, trapping     (2) Clause (1)(e) does not prohibit a person who holds a valid license
fur-bearing animals   to trap fur-bearing animals designated by regulation from trapping such
                      animals on a Sunday during a period of the year when, and in an area
                      where, the trapping of that animal is permitted under the regulations.
                      1998,c.107,s.19; 2003,c.46,s.5; 2008,c.64,s.13.


                                                           16
                           Wildlife Conservation Act               Cap. W-4.1                    17



19.1 No person, except a conservation officer shall use or wear a uniform       Wearing uniform or
or badge identifying that person as a conservation officer, or shall in any     badge

way represent himself or herself to be a conservation officer.
2008,c.64,s.14.

                              ENFORCEMENT

20. (1) A conservation officer may arrest without a warrant a person            Arrest without
whom                                                                            warrant

    (a) the conservation officer finds committing an offence pursuant to
    this Act or the regulations; or
    (b) on reasonable and probable grounds, the conservation officer
    believes is committing or has recently committed an offence
    pursuant to this Act or the regulations.
  (2) Repealed by 2008,c.64,s.15.                                               Search with warrant

  (3) Repealed by 2008,c.64,s.15.                                               Search without
                                                                                warrant
  (4) Where the Minister or a conservation officer believes, on                 Order of Minister or
reasonable grounds, that a person is carrying on or contributing to an          Conservation
                                                                                Officer
action or an activity that
     (a) is detrimental to wildlife or to wildlife habitat; or
     (b) contravenes a provision of this Act or the regulations or a permit
     or a license issued under this Act,
the Minister or a conservation officer, as the case may be, may issue an
order requiring any person carrying out or contributing to the action or
activity to do any or all of the following, at the person’s own cost:
     (c) meet with a representative of the Department and other persons
     for the purposes that are specified by the order;
     (d) carry out or permit inspections, testing and sampling, as
     specified in the order;
     (e) cease an activity specified in the order either permanently or for
     a period of time, as specified in the order;
     (f) clean, repair, and restore the area affected by the action or
     activity to the extent specified in the order, or to the satisfaction of
     the Minister;
     (g) take specified action to prevent or avoid danger to wildlife or
     damage to wildlife habitat or property;
     (h) submit a written report with respect to his or her activities
     pursuant to clauses (d), (f) and (g).
   (4.1) An order made under subsection (4) may require the person who          Idem
is the subject of the order to comply with the order without delay or as of
a future date specified in the order.



                                      17
18                   Cap. W-4.1                 Wildlife Conservation Act



Effect of order        (5) The issue of an order under subsection (4) does not preclude the
                     prosecution of an offence under this Act or the Environmental Protection
                     Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap. E-9.
Service of order       (6) An order referred to in subsection (4) shall be personally served on
                     the person who is the subject of the order or sent to the person by
                     registered mail addressed to the person at his or her last known address.
Emergency order        (7) Notwithstanding subsection (6), where, in the opinion of the
                     Minister or a conservation officer, an emergency exists and an order
                     must be issued under subsection (4), the Minister or a conservation
                     officer, as the case may be, may issue a verbal or a written order to the
                     person who is carrying out or contributing to the action or activity that is
                     detrimental to wildlife or to wildlife habitat.
Order effective        (8) A written order issued under subsection (7) shall take effect from
when issued          the time it is issued.
Effect of verbal       (9) A verbal order issued under subsection (7) shall have the same
order                force and effect as a written order.
Service in written      (10) An order issued under subsection (7) shall be made in written
form                 form by the Minister or the conservation officer, as the case may be, and
                     served in accordance with subsection (6) as soon as is practicable after it
                     is issued.
Revocation, terms      (11) The Minister may, as the Minister considers necessary,
and conditions           (a) impose terms and conditions on any order issued under this
                         section;
                         (b) alter any terms and conditions of any such order; and
                         (c) revoke any order issued under this section.
Offence                (12) Every person who fails to comply or contravenes an order issued
                     under this section is guilty of an offence and is liable, on summary
                     conviction,
                         (a) to a fine of not less than $200 and not more than $2,000 where
                         the person is a natural person; or
                         (b) to a fine of not less than $2,000 and not more than $10,000
                         where the person is a corporation. 1998,c.107,s.20; 2004,c.23,s.10;
                         2008,c.64,s.15.
Liability for        21. (1) A conservation officer and a natural resource inspector, and any
trespass             person accompanying a conservation officer or a natural resource
                     inspector, may, without being liable for trespass, enter upon and pass
                     through privately-owned land for the purpose of
                          (a) managing and monitoring wildlife and wildlife habitat;
                          (b) investigating threats to wildlife or wildlife habitat; or


                                                           18
                          Wildlife Conservation Act             Cap. W-4.1                     19



    (c) otherwise ensuring compliance with this Act or the regulations.
  (2) A person entering upon privately-owned land pursuant to                Liability for actual
subsection (1) is only liable for actual damages caused by such entry.       damages

1998,c.107,s.21; 2008,c.64,s.16.
21.1 (1) For the purpose of ensuring compliance with this Act or the         Natural resource
regulations, a natural resource inspector or a conservation officer may,     inspector or
                                                                             conservation officer
subject to section 21.2, at any reasonable time enter and inspect            may enter and
    (a) any premises in respect of which a license has been issued, or an    inspect
    application for a license has been made, under this Act or
    regulations; or
    (b) any place or vehicle in which the natural resource inspector or
    conservation officer believes on reasonable grounds there is
       (i) any wildlife,
       (ii) any equipment or implement for the taking of wildlife,
       (iii) any record or other document relevant to the administration
       of this Act or the regulations, or
       (iv) any other thing to which this Act or the regulations apply.
  (2) In carrying out an inspection under this section, a natural resource   Inspection
inspector or conservation officer may
    (a) open any container that the natural resource inspector or
    conservation officer believes on reasonable grounds contains
    anything referred to in subclauses 21.1(1)(b)(i) to (iv);
    (b) inspect anything referred to in subclauses 21.1(1)(b)(i) to (iv)
    and take photographs, samples, and measurements, and conduct any
    tests and analyses, free of charge;
    (c) require any person to produce for inspection or copying, in
    whole or in part, any record or other document relevant to the
    administration of this Act or the regulations;
    (d) use any computer or data processing system at the place to
    examine any data contained in or available to the computer or data
    processing system;
    (e) reproduce any record from the data in the form of a printout or
    other intelligible output and take the printout or other output for
    examination or copying; and
    (f) use any copying equipment at the place to make copies of any
    record or other document.
  (3) The owner or person in charge of any premises, place or vehicle        Assistance and
referred to in subsection (1) and every person found there shall             information

     (a) give the natural resource inspector or conservation officer all
     reasonable assistance to enable the natural resource inspector or
     conservation officer to carry out his or her duties and functions
     under this Act; and


                                     19
20                     Cap. W-4.1                Wildlife Conservation Act



                           (b) provide the natural resource inspector or conservation officer
                           any information with respect to the administration of this Act or the
                           regulations as the natural resource inspector or conservation officer
                           may reasonably require.
Signal to stop           (4) A conservation officer may, for the purpose of enforcing this Act
                       and the regulations, signal or request any person driving a vehicle to
                       stop.
Driver to stop           (5) Where a conservation officer signals or requests a person driving a
                       vehicle to stop, the person shall immediately bring the vehicle to a safe
                       stop and shall not proceed until permitted to do so by the conservation
                       officer. 2008,c.64,s.17.
Natural resource       21.2 (1) A natural resource inspector shall not enter a dwelling-place
inspector shall not    for the purpose of an inspection under section 21.1.
enter dwelling-
place
Entry to dwelling-       (2) A conservation officer may enter a dwelling-place for the purpose
place by               of an inspection under section 21.1
conservation officer
                            (a) with the consent of the occupant; or
                            (b) under the authority of a warrant issued under subsection (3).
Authority to issue       (3) Where on ex parte application a justice is satisfied by information
warrant                on oath that
                           (a) the conditions for entry described in section 21.1 exist in
                           relation to a dwelling-place;
                           (b) entry to the dwelling-place is necessary for any purpose relating
                           to the administration of this Act or the regulations; and
                           (c) entry to the dwelling-place has been refused or there are
                           reasonable grounds for believing that entry will be refused,
                       the justice may issue a warrant authorizing the conservation officer
                       named in the warrant to enter the dwelling-place subject to such
                       conditions as may be specified in the warrant.
Use of force             (4) A conservation officer who executes a warrant shall not use force
                       in the execution of a warrant issued under subsection (3) unless the use
                       of force is specifically authorized in the warrant.
Obstruction              (5) No person shall obstruct, impede or refuse to admit, or aid or assist
                       any person in obstructing, impeding or refusing to admit, a conservation
                       officer or other person acting in execution of a warrant issued under
                       subsection (3). 2008,c.64,s.17.
Things liable to       21.3 (1) Subject to subsection (2), where a natural resource inspector or
seizure                conservation officer believes on reasonable grounds that a person has
                       contravened this Act or the regulations, the natural resource inspector or
                       conservation officer may seize and detain anything, including wildlife,


                                                            20
                          Wildlife Conservation Act             Cap. W-4.1                      21



    (a) by means of or in relation to which the natural resource
    inspector or conservation officer believes on reasonable grounds the
    Act or the regulations has been contravened; or
    (b) that the natural resource inspector or conservation officer
    believes on reasonable grounds will afford evidence in respect of a
    contravention of this Act or the regulations.
  (2) Every person, upon being requested to do so by a conservation          Production of
officer, shall without delay produce and allow the conservation officer to   firearm and
                                                                             ammunition
inspect any firearm and ammunition in that person’s possession or under
that person’s control. 2008,c.64,s.17.
21.4 (1) Where on ex parte application a justice is satisfied by             Authority to issue
information on oath that there are reasonable grounds to believe that        warrant

there is in any place anything, including wildlife,
     (a) by means of or in relation to which this Act or the regulations
     have been contravened or are suspected of having been contravened;
     or
     (b) that there are reasonable grounds to believe will afford evidence
     in respect of a contravention of this Act or the regulations,
the justice may at any time issue a warrant authorizing a conservation
officer to enter and search the place for the thing or record or document
and to seize it.
  (2) A conservation officer who executes a warrant issued under             Things liable to
subsection (1) may exercise the powers described in section 21.1 and         seizure

may seize, in addition to any thing mentioned in the warrant, any other
thing, including wildlife,
    (a) by means of or in relation to which the conservation officer
    believes on reasonable grounds this Act or the regulations have been
    contravened; or
    (b) that the conservation officer believes on reasonable grounds will
    afford evidence in respect of a contravention of this Act or the
    regulations.
  (3) A warrant issued under subsection (1) shall be executed by day         Execution of
unless the justice authorizes its execution by night.                        warrant


  (4) A conservation officer may exercise any of the powers referred to      Exercise of powers
in subsections (1) and (2) without a warrant if the conditions for           without a warrant

obtaining a warrant exist but by reason of exigent circumstances it would
not be practicable to obtain a warrant. 2008,c.64,s.17.
                                                                             Seizure of wildlife
22. (1) A natural resource inspector or a conservation officer who
suspects on reasonable grounds that any wildlife has a disease may seize



                                     21
22                    Cap. W-4.1                 Wildlife Conservation Act



                      the wildlife for the purpose of performing a biological or scientific
                      examination of it.
Diseased wildlife       (2) Where wildlife seized under subsection (1) is found to have a
                      disease, the Minister may direct that it be treated, destroyed, or otherwise
                      disposed of in such manner as is reasonably required under the
                      circumstances.
Incapacitated or        (3) A natural resource inspector or a conservation officer may seize
nuisance wildlife     and may destroy, if necessary, any wildlife that has become incapacitated
                      or is a nuisance or a menace to lives and property. 1998,c.107,s.22;
                      2008,c.64,s.18.
Detention of seized   23. (1) Except as provided in this Act or the regulations, a conservation
property              officer who has seized property pursuant to this Act or the regulations
                      may detain the same pending disposition of the prosecution.
Disposition of          (2) A conservation officer may
seized property           (a) return the seized property to the person from whom it was seized
                          or to whom it belongs before it is dealt with in the courts;
                          (b) in the case of dead wildlife or exotic wildlife, dispose, in
                          accordance with the discretion of the Minister, of any part of it that
                          is not required as evidence; or
                          (c) in the case of live wildlife or exotic wildlife,
                               (i) in accordance with the direction of the Minister, keep it in
                               captivity or deliver it to another person to have it kept in
                               captivity, kill it or otherwise dispose of it, or
                               (ii) dispose of it in any manner agreed to by the owner.
Costs recoverable       (3) Where wildlife is delivered to another person, the Minister may
as debt due the       assess the cost of keeping it in captivity to the owner or person in
Crown
                      possession, or both, and that cost shall be paid on demand by the person
                      assessed and is recoverable by the Minister as a debt due the Crown.
Release of seized       (4) Where any vehicle or vessel has been seized pursuant to this Act or
vehicle or vessel     the regulations, the registered owner or any person on the owner’s behalf
                      may file with the Minister a bond in favour of the province that is
                      executed by two personal sureties considered satisfactory by the Minister
                      or an approved guarantee or surety company and that is conditional on
                      payment of all damages and costs that may be recovered against the
                      accused, whereupon the Minister may release the seized property to the
                      owner or the owner’s agent upon payment to the Minister of all fees and
                      expenses incurred in connection with the seizure and detention of the
                      seized property. 1998,c.107,s.23.
Return of seized
property              24. (1) Where a person charged with an offence pursuant to this Act or
                      the regulations is acquitted, any seized property shall be returned.


                                                            22
                          Wildlife Conservation Act              Cap. W-4.1                      23



  (2) Notwithstanding subsection (1), if the seized property is wildlife,
                                                                              Return of wildlife
the Minister may return the item if it has not perished or pay such value
for the item as is determined by the Minister.
  (3) Where anything is seized pursuant to this Act and the regulations       Owner of seized
and the owner is unknown or cannot be ascertained or cannot be found          property unknown

within three months of the seizure, it may be disposed of in such manner
as the Minister may direct.
  (4) The Minister shall not be liable for damages or costs for items         Liability for
seized and detained if there were reasonable and probable grounds for         damages or costs

the seizure. 1998,c.107,s.24.
25. (1) Where any person is convicted                                         Sale of equipment
     (a) of a second or subsequent offence under this Act; or                 seized

     (b) of any of the following offences:
          (i) taking, hunting, trapping or killing any wildlife during a
          closed season,
          (ii) any offence under subsection 31(3), or
          (iii) any offence involving the possession or discharge of a
          loaded firearm in a vehicle or boat,
the equipment used in respect of the offence shall, notwithstanding
sections 23 and 24, be forfeited to the Crown and destroyed or offered
for sale by public auction or used for such purposes as the Minister may
direct.
  (2) The Lieutenant Governor in Council may, by regulations, identify        Automatic
violations of this Act or the regulations for which there will be an          forfeiture of seized
                                                                              property
automatic forfeiture to Her Majesty in right of the province of seized
property upon conviction.
  (3) Where the property seized by a conservation officer is a vehicle or     Seizure of vehicle
vessel, the justice who enters the conviction may order the seized            or vessel

property to be forfeited to Her Majesty in right of the province and direct
the registered owner to complete an appropriate form of transfer.
1998,c.107,s.25.
26. The Minister may dispose of forfeited items at public auction or in       Disposal at public
such manner and at such times as the Minister may direct.                     auction

1998,c.107,s.26.
27. (1) No person shall fail or refuse to comply with any order, visible      Failure to comply
signal or direction given by a conservation officer in uniform or             with order

displaying proper identification.




                                     23
24                   Cap. W-4.1                 Wildlife Conservation Act



Stopping vehicles,     (2) No person shall fail to stop a vehicle, vessel or other conveyance
etc.                 when so required by a conservation officer in uniform or displaying
                     identification as a conservation officer. 1998,c.107,s.27; 2008,c.64,s.19.

                                                    REGULATIONS

Regulations          28. The Lieutenant Governor in Council may make regulations
                         (a) promoting firearm safety, imposing requirements with respect to
                         the holding of firearm safety certificates and generally with respect
                         to the issue, suspension and revocation of firearm safety certificates;
                         (a.1) respecting the qualifications required for appointment as Chief
                         Conservation Officer or as a conservation officer;
                         (a.2) respecting the requirements for appointment as a cadet
                         conservation officer;
                         (a.3) prescribing the oath or solemn affirmation of office of a
                         conservation officer and a cadet conservation officer;
                         (a.4) respecting the information required to be contained in an
                         information card issued to a conservation officer or a cadet
                         conservation officer;
                         (b) prescribing the terms and conditions of, and the fees for, any
                         license or permit;
                         (c) respecting the licensing of taxidermists;
                         (d) governing the keeping of wildlife in captivity;
                         (e) respecting the taking or capturing of wildlife for educational,
                         scientific, display, falconry, fur farming or pet purposes;
                         (f) regarding the export, import, transfer and sale of wildlife;
                         (g) requiring applicants for a trapping license who have not
                         previously held a license or a junior trapping permit to undergo a
                         trapper education program of such description as may be prescribed;
                         (h) respecting the farming of game animals and licensing and
                         regulating the operation of game farms;
                         (i) protecting the habitat of wildlife including their nests, dens, dams
                         and burrows;
                         (j) respecting the capture and removal or destruction of nuisance
                         wildlife;
                         (k) providing for the capture, identification and release of wildlife
                         for the purpose of scientific study of wildlife and wildlife habitats;
                         (l) respecting the use of guides by non-resident hunters and fishers
                         and regulating the licensing and activities of guides;
                         (m) for the licensing of fishing preserves and shooting preserves and
                         the management and use of such areas;
                         (n) designating wildlife management areas and regulating the taking
                         of wildlife within those areas, including open seasons and bag limits;
                         (o) providing for the issue of tags to holders of licenses and permits
                         and the manner in which tags are to be affixed to wildlife;


                                                           24
                          Wildlife Conservation Act              Cap. W-4.1                 25



    (p) prescribing open seasons and the days and hours during which a
    person may hunt wildlife and prescribing the time of sunrise and
    sunset;
    (q) prohibiting and regulating methods and devices for hunting,
    trapping, snaring and taking wildlife;
    (r) designating endangered and threatened species and species of
    special concern and providing for the conservation, protection and
    management of such species and their habitat;
    (r.1) designating extinct species and extirpated species;
    (s) prescribing courses relating to safety and education for hunters,
    trappers and fishers and appointing instructors to teach courses;
    (t) providing for returns and reports to be submitted by holders of
    licenses and permits;
    (u) regulating the training and use of dogs for hunting;
    (v) prescribing the conditions and types of traps or snares that may
    be set or maintained for trapping wildlife, prescribing times when
    such traps or snares must be tended and providing means to identify
    the owner thereof;
    (w) regulating the destruction of, or interference with the den or nest
    of any other wildlife;
    (x) regulating the possession or release of exotic wildlife;
    (y) regulating the trapping of fur-bearing animals and game;
    (y.1) respecting the buying, selling and bartering of the green hides
    and raw furs of fur-bearing animals;
    (z) regulating angling in ponds and watercourses that have been
    stocked from a government hatchery;
    (z.1) regulating angling of salmon and trout;
    (z.2) prescribing open seasons, daily limits and possession limits in
    respect of hunting and trapping;
    (z.3) establishing a Wildlife Conservation Fund and setting out the
    requirements to obtain a Wildlife Conservation Fund license;
    (aa) designating wildlife or particular species of wildlife for
    particular purposes under the regulations;
    (bb) establishing, conducting and monitoring programs for the
    conservation of wildlife;
    (cc) generally for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the
    provisions of this Act. 1998,c.107,s.28; 2001,c.59,s.3; 2003,c.46,s.6;
    2004,c.23,s.11;2008,c.64,s.20.

                             PROSECUTIONS

29. The Summary Proceedings Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap. S-9 applies to          Summary
all prosecutions and proceedings under this Act. 1998,c.107,s.29.             proceedings




                                     25
26                    Cap. W-4.1                  Wildlife Conservation Act



Residence             30. (1) In any prosecution of a person charged as a non-resident the onus
                      of proving that the person is a resident shall be on the accused.
Burden of proof         (2) In any prosecution arising out of the possession of anything, the
                      burden of proof is on the accused to prove that he or she did not have
                      possession of the thing within the meaning of subsection 1(2).
Place of origin         (3) In the absence of evidence to the contrary, wildlife found within
                      the province shall be presumed to have its place of origin in the province,
                      and where the wildlife is dead it shall be presumed to have been killed
                      within the province.
Possession or            (4) Where a person is charged with a contravention of any provision
control of wildlife   of this Act or the regulations by reason of the person having
or article
                            (a) taken or kept any wildlife, the taking or keeping of which is
                            prohibited;
                            (b) taken or kept any wildlife in an area where, or during a period or
                            at a time when, the taking or keeping was prohibited;
                            (c) had in his or her possession any article the possession of which
                            is prohibited; or
                            (d) had in his or her possession any article in an area where, or
                            during a period or at a time when, possession of the article was
                            prohibited,
                      if it is shown to the satisfaction of a justice that the wildlife or the article
                      was found in the person’s possession or under the person’s control, the
                      person shall be presumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, to
                      have committed the offence with which the person is charged.
No exception            (5) No exception, exemption, proviso, excuse or qualification
required to be        prescribed by law is required to be set out or negatived, as the case may
negatived
                      be, in an information or a summary offence ticket respecting an offence
                      under this Act or the regulations.
Burden of proving        (6) In any prosecution for an offence under this Act or the regulations,
exception             the burden of proving that any exception, exemption, proviso, excuse or
                      qualification prescribed by law operates in favour of the defendant is on
                      the defendant, to prove on a balance of probabilities, and the prosecutor
                      is not required, except by way of rebuttal, to prove that the exception,
                      exemption, proviso, excuse or qualification does not operate in favour of
                      the defendant, whether or not it is set out in the information or summary
                      offence ticket. 1998,c.107,s.30; 2008,c.64,s.21.
Conviction or         31. (1) Upon the conviction of a person for a violation of this Act or the
offence, effect of    regulations or the Migratory Birds Convention Act (Canada) or the
                      regulations made under that Act or the Fisheries Act (Canada) R.S.C.
                      1985, Chap. F-14 or the regulations made under that Act respecting


                                                             26
                           Wildlife Conservation Act              Cap. W-4.1                    27



fishing for trout and salmon and netting in inland waters, the hunting,
fishing or trapping privileges of the person shall be suspended from the
date of the conviction in the case of a first offence, for one year and in
the case of a second or subsequent offence, for two years.
  (2) Where a violation of this Act is committed while a person was            Suspension of
hunting, fishing or trapping under the authority of a valid license issued     license for
                                                                               conviction
pursuant to this Act, the license shall be suspended from the date of
conviction, in the case of a first offence, for one calendar year and in the
case of a second or subsequent offence, for two years.
   (3) Every person who hunts, fishes or traps when                            Offence of hunting,
     (a) his or her privilege to do so is suspended under subsection (1);      fishing, trapping
                                                                               when suspended
     or
     (b) his or her license is suspended under subsection (2),
is guilty of an offence and be liable on summary conviction to the fine of
not less than $300.
  (4) For the avoidance of doubt it is declared that subsection (1) applies    Application of
to persons who are exempted from the requirement to be licensed                subsection (1)

pursuant to subsection 12(2). 1998,c.107,s.31.

                                 GENERAL

32. (1) Every person who violates or attempts to violate any provision         Fines
of this Act or the regulations is guilty of an offence and is liable on
summary conviction to the fine specified in this Act or prescribed in the
regulations and, if no fine is specified or prescribed, is liable
    (a) in the case of a first offence, to a fine not exceeding $2,000 and
    not less than $200;
    (b) in the case of a second or subsequent offence, to a fine not
    exceeding $10,000 and not less than $400.
  (2) A person who commits or continues an offence on more than one            Continuing offence
day may be convicted of a separate offence for each day on which the
offence is committed or continued.
  (3) Where a person is convicted of an offence the justice who enters         Order for remedial
the conviction may, in addition to any penalty imposed pursuant to this        action or costs
                                                                               thereof
Act or the regulations, make an order directing the person
     (a) to take any action specified in the order to remedy or avoid any
     harm to any wildlife or wildlife habitat that resulted or may result
     from the commission of the offence;
     (b) to pay the Minister compensation in whole or in part, for the cost
     of any remedial or preventive action taken by the Minister as a result
     of the commission of the offence.



                                      27
28                      Cap. W-4.1                Wildlife Conservation Act



Liability of officers     (4) Where a corporation commits an offence under this Act, any
of corporations         officer, director or agent of the corporation who directed, authorized,
                        assented to or acquiesced or participated in the commission of the
                        offence is a party to and guilty of the offence and is liable on conviction
                        to the punishment provided for the offence, whether or not the
                        corporation has been prosecuted or convicted. 1998,c.107,s.32;
                        2001,c.59,s.4; 2003,c.46,s.7,8; 2004,c.23,s.12.
Repeal                  33. (1) The Fish and Game Protection Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap. F-12 is
                        repealed.
Regulations under         (2) Pursuant to clause 33(1)(e) of the Interpretation Act R.S.P.E.I.
repealed Act            1988, Cap. I-8, the regulations made under the repealed Act are deemed
                        to be made under this Act and remain in force until revoked or others are
                        made in their stead. 1998,c.107,s.33; 2001,c.59,s.5; 2003,c.46,s.9.
Amendment               34. Consequential amendment. 1998,c.107,s.34.




                                                             28
